SOURCE: https://rentboard.berkeleyca.gov/elected-rent-board/news/2026-adjustments-relocation-assistance-payments
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:35 UTC

2026 Adjustments of Relocation Assistance Payments | Berkeley Rent Board
Skip to main content
Skip to site search
City of Berkeley
Share
Print
2026 Adjustments of Relocation Assistance Payments
Annual increases for owner move-in and Ellis Act eviction relocation assistance payments go into effect January 1, 2026.
Published:
October 27, 2025
Last Updated:
October 27, 2025
The Rent Stabilization and Good Cause for Eviction Ordinance requires owners to pay tenants relocation assistance in the event of an owner move-in eviction. The Ellis Implementation Ordinance requires the same relocation assistance payments for tenants evicted so the owner can remove a property from the rental housing market. Both ordinances index the relocation payments to inflation, and provide that the Rent Board shall publish the yearly inflationary increases.
At its October 16, 2025 Special Meeting, the Rent Board approved relocation assistance payment increases that will go into effect on January 1, 2026.
The standard relocation assistance payment will increase to
$19,413
.
The additional relocation assistance payment for qualifying households will increase to
$6,471
.
These increases represent a 1.5% upward adjustment in the previous amounts, which is the 12-month increase in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose region. These annual increases are required by the terms set forth in the Rent and Ellis Implementation Ordinances.
You can read the
2026 Inflationary Adjustment of Relocation Assistance Payments staff report
to learn more about the adjustment. Please visit our
Owner Move-In Eviction
and
Ellis Act Eviction
pages for more information about these types of evictions and relocation assistance payments.
Get trusted information about the City of Berkeley by bookmarking
berkeleyca.gov
,
subscribing to our newsletter
, and following us on
Bluesky
and
Instagram
.
Media Contact
DéSeana Williams
Executive Director
DeWilliams@berkeleyca.gov
News
Berkeley Rent Board to Host Inaugural Landlord Resource Fair on July 22
UPDATED: Rent Board Adopts to Extend Amnesty Period for Units Newly Required to Register Under Measure BB
Need Help in Your Language? Visit Our New Language Access Services Page
UPDATED: Registration Fees for Fiscal Year (FY) 2026-2027
More News