SOURCE: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1j4U3fDtmnYuwcUWhx5BMUcXc1bnKT8Ku/view?usp=sharing
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:44 UTC

 
Page 1 of 3 (February 2017) 
 
 
 
Department of Neighborhood Development (DND) 
Sheila A. Dillon, Chief & Director 
 
 
BOSTON FAIR CHANCE TENANT SELECTION POLICY  
 
 
Under this policy, housing providers agree to the following: 
 
Housing providers receiving Department of Neighborhood Development (DND) funding and/or 
land, or that have income restricted units created under the Boston Planning and Development 
Agency (BPDA) Inclusionary Development Policy will not impose a blanket policy that denies 
housing to anyone with arrests and or convictions. Housing providers will consider applicants on 
a case-by-case basis. 
 
1. The Developer/Agent (Agent) agrees to not consider any of the following categories when 
determining housing eligibility and or considering eviction: 
 
a) Arrests that did not result in conviction. This includes dismissed charges, diversion 
programs, and similar non-convictions. 
b) Convictions that are subject to a form of judicial relief, such as expungement, sealing, 
and certificates for relief from disabilities. 
c) Juvenile records 
d) A conviction more than 5 years old. Tenant selection policy related to arrests and 
convictions does not apply in situations where there is: 
 
 A direct relationship between a conviction and the housing sought and or unreasonable 
risk of substantial harm to the safety of others.  
 Landlords would consider additional factors such as: evidence of rehabilitation, the time 
that has elapsed since the conviction occurred, and/or the age of the person at the time 
the conviction occurred. 
 This guidance does not apply to current criminal behavior.  
 

 
Page 2 of 3 (February 2017) 
 
2. The Agent is strongly encouraged to use the Department of Criminal Justice Information 
Services (DCJIS), as a method of validating Criminal Offender Records Information 
(CORI). 
 
3. The Agent is strongly encouraged to assign the same staff to assess if a person’s CORI 
is cause for housing denial to ensure consistency in practice.  
 
4. When feasible, housing providers should provide an appeals process for denial of 
housing applications due to a conviction. Staffing and size of housing provider should be 
reviewed when determining feasibility.  
 
5. Where federal or state law imposes a criminal history requirement that conflicts with a 
requirement of this guidance, the federal or state law preempts this policy. 
 
Factors that a housing provider should consider: 
 
1. The circumstances leading to the conviction, such as: 
 
a) Whether the conviction arose from a person’s disability, therefore entitling the applicant to 
civil rights protections for persons with disabilities; 
b) Whether the conviction arose out of a person’s experience as a survivor of domestic 
abuse, sexual assault, dating violence, and/or stalking, therefore entitling the applicant to 
protection under the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA); 
 
1. The circumstances of the underlying criminal activity, such as: 
 
a) The seriousness of the criminal activity; 
b) The relationship between the criminal activity and the safety of other residents on the 
property; 
c) The frequency of relevant criminal activity; 
d) The length of time since the criminal activity occurred; 
e) The age of the household member at the time the criminal activity occurred. 
 
2. The circumstances that have taken place since the criminal activity and conviction: 
 
a) Whether the applicant has a satisfactory rental history; 
b) Whether the applicant successfully completed the terms of his or her sentence; 
c) If the criminal activity arose from a substance abuse problem, whether the 
applicant has successfully undergone substance abuse treatment; 
d) Other factors to consider include: 
 
Page 3 of 3 (February 2017) 
 
 Employment 
 Education and/ or work training 
 Community involvement, such as church or community groups 
 Family support network 
 
e) In determining these factors, the housing provider should give the applicant a list of 
examples of mitigating evidence, such as letters of recommendations, certificates of 
program completion, applicant statements, and other supporting documents. 
 
4. The effect that a denial of admission will have on the household and the community. 
5. Credit. 
  a) The agent agrees not to use the applicant credit score to approve or deny housing    
applications.  
 
  b) Property Managers may consider an applicant’s credit history, but such information may 
ONLY be used in lieu of rental history to determine an applicant’s ability to pay rent when rental 
history is not available. Where insufficient credit is the basis for rejection, mitigating 
circumstances may include: 
 
 a representative payer or other reliable third party who would take written responsibility for 
payment; 
 evidence that insufficient credit was the result of a disability;  
 evidence that insufficient credit was the result of other circumstances and there is reason to 
believe that applicant will now pay rent promptly and in full. 
 
  c) An applicant’s ability and willingness to pay rent must be demonstrated through an 
identifiable source of sufficient income to pay rent and prior rental history. The lack of credit 
history, as opposed to poor credit history, is not sufficient justification to reject an applicant. An 
Agent must also take into account rent burden if an applicant can demonstrate a history of 
satisfying a higher rent burden than the Agent normally employs.    
 
  d) The Agent shall have the right to request information reasonably needed to verify the 
mitigating circumstances, even if such information is of a confidential nature (e.g. verifications 
from medical professionals that provide confidential information.). The Agent shall treat all 
sensitive or confidential information with utmost care and return any and all documents 
containing such information to the applicant promptly after review. If the applicant refuses to 
provide or give access to such further information the Agent may choose not to give further 
consideration to the mitigating circumstance. 
 
This policy will also be applied to the Office of Fair Housing and Equity Affirmative Marketing 
Program which promotes equal access to publicly funded housing for all persons by establishing 
standards for public outreach, advertising and tenant/buyer selection criteria.  