SOURCE: https://www.boston.gov/departments/fair-housing-and-equity/boston-fair-housing-regulations
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:35 UTC

Boston Fair Housing Regulations | Boston.gov
Skip to Main Content
An official website of the City of Boston.
Here's how you know
city_hall
Official websites use .boston.gov
A .boston.gov website belongs to an official government organization in the City of Boston.
lock
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A lock
(
lock
)
or https:// means you've safely connected to the
.gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure
websites.
Boston.gov Search
Get direct answers to your questions about City of Boston services, programs, and information. While we strive for accuracy by sourcing directly from Boston.gov, our search can occasionally provide unexpected results. You can help us improve by using the feedback buttons below each answer.
Questions? Contact us at
digital@boston.gov
.
Please note: AI-generated responses may contain errors, including about real people. Please verify important information before acting on it.
You must have JavaScript enabled to use this form.
Search Boston.gov
Search
Choose a search type
Search results
AI summary
Popular searches
Excise taxes
Pay parking ticket
City of Boston jobs
Popular questions
What is my trash pickup schedule?
How do I pay my excise taxes?
How do I get a resident parking sticker?
Boston Fair Housing Regulations
Find out how the Fair Housing Commission enforces fair housing laws in Boston.
Toggle
Page Sections
We enforce local, state, and federal fair housing laws. The commission is a Fair Housing Assistance Program. You can learn more about federal programs authorized
to investigate housing discrimination through the
US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Still have questions? Contact:
Fair Housing and Equity
617-635-2500
send an email
1 City Hall Square
Room 966
Boston
,
MA
02201-2041
United States
Laws and discrimination
Our commission makes sure property owners don't discriminate against tenants or buyers.
In the City of Boston, it’s illegal to discriminate when renting, buying, selling, or securing financing for any housing.
You can’t discriminate someone based on their:
Race
Color
Religion
Disability
National Origin
Ancestry
Sex
Gender Identity
Gender Expression
Age
Sexual Orientation
Marital Status
Rental Assistance
*
Family Status
**
Military Status
*
For example renters using Section 8 voucher
**
For example, a landlord can’t discriminate against someone if they have children
Learn who else is protected by the
Fair Housing Act
.
What is housing discrimination?
Discrimination comes in many forms. Some examples of housing discrimination include:
The landlord tells you they don't accept rental assistance. This includes Section
8 vouchers, social security disability vouchers, and veterans vouchers.
You are told you should or shouldn't live in certain neighborhoods based on your race, religion, or disability.
The property owner tells you the apartment has been rented, but you later see it listed again.
You were told your family can't rent a property because there is lead paint.
The terms of your rental or sale are different than the terms of other tenants. For example, you might be paying different fees.
If you feel like you've faced housing discrimination, you can
file a complaint
with our office.
Facing housing discrimination?
The first thing you should do is
file a complaint.
Our commission takes housing discrimination seriously. We will investigate all complaints. If we find that there has been discrimination, we’ll try to resolve the complaint.
If the housing discrimination happened outside of Boston, you'll need to
file a complaint through the state
. If you've faced any non-housing discrimination, you can also
file a complaint through the state
.
Still have questions? Contact:
Fair Housing and Equity
617-635-2500
send an email
1 City Hall Square
Room 966
Boston
,
MA
02201-2041
United States
Provide Your Feedback