SOURCE: https://www.cambridgema.gov/tenantrights
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:36 UTC

Tenants Rights and Resources Notification Ordinance Overview Information and FAQs - City of Cambridge, MA
Skip to Navigation
Skip to Main Content
Skip to Footer
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government
organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
A locked padlock
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
secure websites.
The City of Cambridge Tenants Rights and Resources Ordinance, Chapter 8.71 of the Cambridge Municipal Code was established to inform and educate both residential tenants and landlords in Cambridge of their rights and responsibilities as a landlord or tenant.
The Ordinance requires owners, landlords, and management companies to provide you with information at the start of your lease or tenancy as well as when your tenancy is being terminated.
The purpose of the Ordinance is to ensure that housing information and resources are available to the City’s residents, neighborhoods, and community.
View Full Ordinance
View Tenants Rights and Resources PDF
View FAQs PDF
Frequently Asked Questions
What is the timing of when I must provide the information?
It is required to provide this Guide at the inception and termination of tenancies. For new tenancies, the Guide must be provided when a tenant signs a lease or enters into a tenancy agreement for the first time or tenders the first month’s rent. The Ordinance also requires that a landlord provide the Guide to tenants when legal steps to terminate a tenancy are taken (ex. Notice to Quit or Summary Process).
If I am renewing a lease with an existing tenant do I need to do anything?
It is good practice to provide the this Guide during renewals, but you are not required to offer materials at each renewal.
Do I need to supply the informational material to a tenant at will?
Yes, all tenants and lawful occupants must be provided a copy of the materials.
Do I need to have the Tenant sign receipt of the information?
The Ordinance does not require this; however, it would be good practice to do so.
Does the Ordinance prevent me from evicting my tenants?
This Ordinance does not prevent a landlord from initiating an eviction action if otherwise allowed by law. However, the notice of housing rights and resources should provide landlords and tenants with a better understanding of the eviction process as well as the resources potentially available that may mitigate and prevent the eviction. For example, if you have been happy with your tenant except for the fact that they have fallen behind in rent and you are therefore beginning the eviction process due to non–payment of rent, the resources contained in the Guide may assist you in finding alternatives to eviction. If you do begin an eviction process through a notice to quit or other action, it is required that you offer the Guide about rights and resources at the same time.
I am the owner of only one rental unit that is in the building in which I live. Do I have to comply with the Ordinance?
Yes, the Ordinance applies to a residential rental agreements, including single residential dwelling unit. Some owners may be unaware of how the eviction process works and how it might be avoided. The Guide provided will hopefully assist landlords and tenants. Knowing about rights and resources will save owners time and money.
Is anyone exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance? Can it be waived?
Yes, this Ordinance does NOT apply to: rental units in a hospital, skilled nursing facility or health facility or in a non-profit facility that has the primary purpose of providing short term assistance, treatment, assistance or therapy for alcohol, drug or other substance abuse. (Please read the definition of
short-term treatment in the full Ordinance
found in Sec 8.71.030)
In addition, the Ordinance does NOT apply to Short Term Rental Units as set forth in Article 4, Section 4.60 of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance.
What happens if I do NOT comply?
We encourage you to read the full scope of Section 8.71.070 “Violation Penalty” of the Ordinance and to consult an attorney if you have questions. You may be fined $300 for each day’s violation.
What should I do as a Tenant?
Read and become familiar with the information packet of materials. If the information has not been provided to you at your lease signing, go to the City website to download the materials. You may also want to reach out to your landlord or their management company and remind them of the information packet. Reach out for help if you are being evicted.
Who can I contact for more information?
Anyone can contact the Cambridge Office of the Housing Liaison at 617-349-7222 or email housingliaison@cambridgema.gov.
Multilingual Materials
City of Cambridge Tenants Rights and Resources Notification
(PDF)
Tenants Rights and Resources Notification Information Packet
(English)
সিটি অফ কেমব্রিজ ভাড়াটের অধিকার এবং সম্পদ
(Bangla)
剑桥市租户权利及资源
(Simplified Chinese)
በካምብሪጅ ከተማ የተከራዮች መብቶች እና ግብዓቶች
(Amharic)
Dwa ak Resous Lokatè Vil Cambridge
(Haitian Creole)
Direitos e recursos dos inquilinos da cidade de Cambridge
(Portuguese)
Derechos y recursos de los inquilinos de la ciudad de Cambridge
(Spanish)
مدينة كامربيدج حقوق وموارد املستأجرين
(Arabic)
Page was posted on 10/14/2020 2:17 PM
Page was last modified on 3/17/2025 6:03 PM
Provide feedback on this page
Contact Us
How can we help?
Please provide as much detail below as possible so City staff can respond to your inquiry:
Description:
*
Name:
Email:
As a governmental entity, the Massachusetts Public Records Law applies to records made or received by the City. Any information received through use of this site is subject to the same provisions as information provided on paper.
Read our complete privacy statement
Service Requests
Enter a service request via SeeClickFix
for things like missed trash pickups, potholes, etc.
Close