SOURCE: https://cityclerk.lacity.org/onlinedocs/2024/24-1031_misc_9-03-24.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:36 UTC

MOTION
SEP 0 3 2024
I THEREFORE MOVE that the City Council instruct the Los Angeles Housing Department to 
report on the number of ownership and management entities that are using algorithm-based 
software to establish rents and the feasibility of instituting a ban on the use of this software to set 
rents in the City.
mulisom 
mcatrn
masanarna 
exyrs Banserem
Action is being taken to address the negative impacts caused by algorithm-based software. 
It is reported that RealPage is currently being investigated by the Department of Justice over a 
concern that RealPage’s software is “used as a shield for competitors to exchange sensitive pricing 
data that their rivals would otherwise not be able to access.” Numerous other lawsuits have been 
filed against RealPage and similar companies, including the District of Columbia Attorney General 
in November 2023, the Arizona Attorney General in February 2024, and more than 20 private class 
action lawsuits nationwide. In July 2024, the San Francisco Board of Supervisors approved 
legislation to ban property owners and managers from using algorithm-based tools that recommend 
or set rental prices. It is imperative that the City understand the impact that these tools have on its 
rental stock and its residents, and what measures can be taken to address any negative outcomes.
The City Council has been working to address the housing affordability crisis through a 
number of measures. The City has supported the construction of new units, implemented land use 
measures to support the creation of affordable units, and made a significant financial investment 
in the expansion of affordable housing. Recent news reports have documented that certain 
companies are using algorithm-based tools to establish rent prices that increase eviction rates and 
add fees to inflate rent. Since 60 percent of the City’s housing units are renter-occupied, it is critical 
that the City take action to support housing stability for its residents.
One of the companies that provides this software is RealPage, a revenue management 
company whose rent-setting algorithm is said to hold lease transaction data for more than 13 
million units across the country It is reported that twenty (20) companies that use RealPage’s rent­
setting tool in Los Angeles account for more than 52 percent of all rental apartment buildings in 
the City.
Recent reports note that some corporate landlords are using Artificial Intelligence and 
algorithm-based software to estimate supply and demand for their listings, allowing them to 
maximize rents. The software sets new daily prices for every available unit by drawing from 
competitor data on the actual rent tenants pay, as opposed to the publicly advertised rent. This tool 
can be used by companies to stifle rental competition, which is a potential violation of antitrust 
law.
SECONDED BYWOTUAXUXXk )
PRESENTED By.5Ze_K/@
HEATHER HUTT
Councilmember, 10th District
HOUSING & HOMELESSNESS
