SOURCE: https://housing.lacity.gov/residents/just-cause-for-eviction-ordinance-jco
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:36 UTC

Just Cause For Eviction Ordinance (JCO) – LAHD
Skip to main content
Los Angeles Housing Department
Quick Links:
Announcements
Website Feedback
Just Cause For Eviction Ordinance (JCO)
Back
Print
September 10th, 2026
|
Click
here
for FAQs and information about the JCO/Just Cause Enforcement fee exemptions
Just Cause For Eviction Ordinance (JCO)
If you own rental property in the City of Los Angeles, it may be subject to the
Just Cause Ordinance
(JCO).  It prohibits terminations of tenancies without just cause and requires relocation assistance for no-fault evictions.
Rental Units Covered Under JCO
The JCO covers most residential properties in the City of Los Angeles that are not regulated by the City’s Rent Stabilization Ordinance (RSO).
In order to apply to a tenancy, it requires that the tenant either has lived in the same unit for at least six months or that their original lease expired, whichever comes first.  There are other specific exceptions to the JCO including, but not limited to, transient hotels, licensed care facilities, fraternity or sorority houses, owner’s roommate, cooperatives under certain circumstances, some non-profit facilities for the homeless or short-term treatment centers for substance abuse, and some properties owned by HACLA or the government.  The JCO can apply to buildings that are newer than October 1, 1978.  The JCO can apply to a property that contains only one single-family dwelling.
Legal Reasons for Eviction
Tenant i
s at-fault
Under the JCO, the landlord may recover possession of a rental unit
in specific situations. Below is a list of reasons for which a tenant could be evicted and
would be considered at fault
. If the tenant is at fault
for the eviction, then the tenant will not be entitled to relocation assistance.
Failure to pay rent
Failure to cure a violation of the rental agreement
Creating a nuisance or causing damage to the property
Using the rental unit for an illegal purpose
Failure to renew a similar rental agreement
Failure to provide the landlord with reasonable access to the rental unit
The person at the end of the lease term is a subtenant not approved by the landlord
Tenant is not at-fault
Situations in which the property owner wishes to regain the use of the rental unit, as the result of a personal or business decision, and
not the
tenant’s fault, may be cause for eviction, but the property owner may have to pay the tenant
relocation assistance
. These reasons include
The
owner or an immediate family member
will move into the rental unit
Resident manager will move into the rental unit when required by law or by an affordable housing covenant or regulatory agreement
Demolition, permanent removal from the rental market, or conversion to
non-residential
Government order to vacate
HUD owns and is selling the property
Residential Hotel being converted or demolished
Conversion to affordable housing
Required Registration and Posted Notification
All properties rented or offered for rent must be
registered annually
. In addition to paying the annual registration fee, landlords are required to complete the
Rent Registry
form. Once registration is complete, the landlord will receive a Registration Certificate (Statement) which must be displayed in a conspicuous place on the property or served to the tenant.
Beginning August 20, 2025, landlords must post a
Notice of Right to Counsel
in a conspicuous common area of the residential building where the tenant resides. This notice is also to be provided to the tenant at the beginning of the tenancy and anytime an eviction notice is served.
All landlords of residential properties must provide a Notice of Renters’ Protections to tenants who begin or renew their tenancy on or after January 27, 2023. This notice must also be posted in an accessible common area of the property. Download the Protections Notice in
English
or
Spanish
. (Other languages are available.)
Evictions for Non-Payment of Rent
Applies to all RSO & JCO rental units. Effective March 27, 2023, landlords may not evict a tenant who falls behind in rent unless the tenant owes an amount higher than the Fair Market Rent (FMR). The FMR depends on the bedroom size of the rental unit.
For example, if a tenant rents a 1-bedroom unit and the rent is $1,500, the landlord cannot evict the tenant since the rent owed is less than the FMR for a 1-bedroom unit.
Eviction Notices Filed with LAHD
Applies to all JCO & RSO rental properties – All eviction notices issued to tenants in the City of Los Angeles must be filed with LAHD within three (3) business days of service on the tenant. For more information, please click
here.
When Can Rent Be Increased Under State Law AB1482
The JCO does not regulate rent increases, however, state law
AB 1482, the California Tenant Protection Act of 2019
,
may regulate the rent amount in buildings that are older than 15 years old.
Effective August 1, 2024 to July 31, 2025, the maximum allowable increase is
8.9%
.
Previously, from August 1, 2023 to July 31, 2024 the maximum annual increase for units subject to AB 1482 was 8.8%
.
(
A
nnual rent increases are limited to no more than 5% plus the percentage change in the cost of living for the region in which the property is located, or 10% whichever is lower).
Properties
not
covered under AB 1482:
-Units that were constructed within the last 15 years (this applies on a rolling basis – i.e.. a unit constructed on January 1, 2006 is not covered as of January, 1 2020, but is covered on and after January 1, 2021).
-Units restricted by a deed, regulatory restrictions, or other recorded document limiting the affordability to low or moderate-income households.
-Certain dormitories.
-A two-unit property, provided the second unit was occupied by an owner of the property for the entire period of the tenancy.
-Single-family homes and condominiums are only exempt from state law but not the JCO if both
(A)
and
(B)
apply:
(A)
the property is
not
owned by one of the following:
(i) a real estate trust, or
(ii) a corporation, or
(iii) an LLC with at least one corporate member.
—–AND—-
(B)
The landlord notified the tenant
in writing
that the tenancy is not subject to the “just cause” and rent increase limitations as specifically described in Civil Code Sections 1946.2(e)(8)(B)(i) and 1947.12(d)(5)(B)(i).
-The limited exemption for single-family homes does not apply where there is more than one dwelling unit on the same lot, or any second residential unit in the building that cannot be sold separately from the subject unit (such as an in-law unit).
-Units that are already subject to the City’s RSO.
Landlord Services
Register RSO & JCO units and pay your bills online or through your mobile phone at
housingbill.lacity.org/billing.org
.
Calendar of Events
(Find the next RSO/JCO Workshop near your home or workplace.)
Sign up for a
Drop-in for Assistance Session
.
Visit one of our
four public counters
or call our Hotline 866-557-RENT (7368)  for answers to pressing RSO/JCO questions or issues.
Find
links to other agencies
with helpful information about the law and other issues of interest to your industry.
To Learn More Information
Stay updated on the new renter protections by clicking
here
.
View the Department’s calendar of events by clicking
here
.
(Visited 245,170 times, 4,153 visits today)
Last modified: September 10, 2026
Comments are closed.
Rent Control Property Overview
Owning or Managing Rental Housing
Billing Information
Do you plan to demolish your rental property?
Tenant Habitability Program (THP)
Cost Recovery Programs
Existing Affordable Housing Developers / Landlords
Quick Links:
Announcements
Online Services
Forms
Ask Housing
Search
Search
﻿
Supported Browsers
The Los Angeles Housing Department’s website no longer works with Internet Explorer.
We recommend switching over to
the latest versions of the browsers listed below.
• Google Chrome
• Microsoft Edge
• Mozilla Firefox
• Safari
Close
Close
Receive the latest news
Do not miss important notifications
SUBSCRIBE TO OUR NEWSLETTERS
HAVE A QUESTION?
FOLLOW US
Close
WEBSITE FEEDBACK
Feedback Form
Name
Email
*
Please enter your email, so we can follow up with you.
Select the categories for which you have feedback
*
Housing
Community Resources
Residents
Rental Property Owners
Partners
Policy & Data
How helpful was this LAHD website?
0
Feedback Topic
*
New feature
Site design/usability
Site content
Other...
Feedback Message
*
reCAPTCHA
If you are human, leave this field blank.
Submit
If you are trying to file a compliant, please
click here
Close
All Announcements :
September TEFRA
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ONMULTIFAMILY HOUSING REVENUE BONDS OR NOTESFOR
Read More About this Article »
Site Design Analysis Request for Proposals (RFP)
This RFP seeks to solicit Proposals from qualified Proposers to
Read More About this Article »
Urgent Repair Program (URP) Construction Services Request for Proposals (RFP)
LAHD is seeking proposals for the provision of Urgent Repair
Read More About this Article »
Financial Advisor Services Request for Proposals (RFP)
LAHD is seeking proposals for the provision of financial advisor
Read More About this Article »
All Announcement
Non-Profit Administrator For The ULA Protections For Tenant Harassment Legal Services Fund RFP
This Request For Proposals (RFP) is to solicit proposals from
Read More About this Article »
Rent Escrow Account Program (REAP) Notices
Rent Escrow Account Program (REAP) Tenant Outreach and Education Services Request for Proposals (RFP)
Description: LAHD is seeking proposals for qualified organizations/contractors to develop
Read More About this Article »
X