SOURCE: https://housing.lacity.gov/residents/rso-overview
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:36 UTC

RSO Overview – LAHD
Skip to main content
Los Angeles Housing Department
Quick Links:
Announcements
Website Feedback
RSO Overview
Back
Print
September 22nd, 2026
|
What Falls Under RSO
If you own rental property in the City of Los Angeles, it may be subject to the
city’s Rent Stabilization Ordinance (RSO)
.
Find out
if your property falls under this ordinance and what you need to know to be in compliance.
Generally, the RSO applies to rental properties that were first built on or before October 1, 1978, as well as replacement units under
LAMC Section 151.28
and if any of the following:
Apartment
Condominium (Rent amount is not regulated for tenancies that commenced after December 31, 1995)
Townhome (Rent amount is not regulated for tenancies that commenced after December 31, 1995)
Duplex
Two or more single-family dwelling units on the same parcel
Rooms in a hotel, motel, rooming house, or boarding house occupied by the same tenant for more than 30 consecutive days
Residential unit(s) attached to a commercial building
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU)
Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit (JADU)
Mobile homes
and recreational vehicles in mobile home parks are also covered under the RSO.
What the RSO Covers
Allowable rent increases
Registration of rental units
Legal reasons for eviction
Types of evictions requiring payment of tenant relocation assistance
RSO disclosure notice for all
“Cash for Keys” or Buyout Agreements
Interest Payments on Security Deposits
When Can Rent Be Increased
Rent increases that do not require LAHD approval
Rent may be increased to the market rate if the tenant:
voluntarily moves out;
does not pay rent and is evicted;
violated the lease agreement and is evicted;
is evicted for failure to comply with a Tenant Habitability Plan; or
is evicted per a City Attorney order.
accepts a
Tenant Buyout Agreement
Rent may be increased once every 12 months by the allowable rent increase percentage (click here to
view the allowable rent increase PDF
). Effective February 2, 2026, the landlord can no longer include an additional percentage increase for utilities.
Effective March 30, 2020, through January 31, 2024, rent increases are prohibited for rental units subject to the Rent Stabilization Ordinance (RSO).
Effective February 2, 2026, an additonal 10% increase for an additional dependent added to the tenancy is no longer permitted. However, a 10% for an additional tenant is allowed (not a dependent) if moves into a rental unit: Landlords can increase the rent within 60 days of learning about the additional tenant. Rent increases for unauthorized additional tenants who moved between March 2020 and December 2023 must be provided an advance written notice of rental increase on or before March 1, 2024.
Click the following link to
view the additional tenant PDF (English).
Click the following link to
view the additional tenant PDF (Spanish).
A $1.61 monthly surcharge may be collected by the landlord as the tenant’s portion of the
Registration
fee. Effective January 1, 2020, the surcharge is $38.75. The landlord may pass through 50% of the fee to the tenant every month rather than once a year.  A 30-day notice must be given to the tenant to collect a rental surcharge of $1.61.
Effective January 1, 2022, a landlord may collect 1/12 of 50% of the annual Systematic Code Enforcement Fee from the tenant of the rental unit per month. (Added by Ord. No. 187,108, Eff. 8/6/21.)
Click the following link to
view the Systematic Code Enforcement Fee PDF (Spanish
).
A $3.00 surcharge may be added to the rent for the installation and cost of a hard-wired
smoke detector
or a combination smoke/
carbon monoxide detector
.
Rent increases that require LAHD approval
Capital Improvement Program
: Landlords can recover costs for improvements to the rental unit or common areas for items that benefit the tenant and will last at least five years (
RAC Reg 210
).
Primary Renovation Program
: Landlords can recover costs for major renovations of building systems or to reduce exposure to hazardous materials
(RAC Reg 220).
Seismic Retrofit Program
: Landlords can recover costs for seismic retrofit work mandated by Soft-Story Ordinance No. 183893.
Rehabilitation Program
: Landlords can recover costs for work in a unit or common area to comply with an order issued by LAHD or other government entities (
RAC Reg 250
).
Just and Reasonable Rent Increase
: A landlord can apply for a rent increase when their net operating income adjusted for inflation is not sufficient to cover the property’s operating expenses (
RAC Reg 240
).
Luxury Exemption
: A landlord can apply for an exemption from the RSO if they can establish the monthly rent charged on or before May 31, 1978,*.
How to Calculate Rent Increases and Surcharges
.
Required Registration and Posted Notification of RSO Rental Units
All Properties with RSO rental units must post a notification. Click here to download the
Notice
.
A landlord must serve a tenant with an
annual registration statement (Certificate).
Beginning August 20, 2025, landlords must post the
Notice of Right to Counsel
and provide it to the tenant at the start of the tenancy. The Notice must also be attached to a copy of any eviction notice or termination of a rental subsidy.
All units rented or offered for rent must be
registered annually
with LAHD. New property owners have 45 days to register their rental property and if applicable, file
Temporary exemptions
.
Beginning in 2017, in addition to paying the annual registration fee, landlords must also complete the
Rent Registry
form.
Owners are responsible for the
payment of annual fees
; however, the cost of registration may be shared by landlords and tenants.
If the status of a previously exempted unit changes, the property owner must notify the LAHD and pay the applicable fees within 10 days.
Legal Reasons for Eviction
Tenant is at-fault
Failure to pay rent
Failure to fix or address a violation of the rental agreement
Creating a nuisance or causing damage to the rental unit
Using the rental unit for an illegal purpose
Failure to renew a similar rental agreement
Failure to provide the landlord with reasonable access to the rental unit
The person at the end of the lease term is a subtenant not approved by the landlord
Tenant is not at-fault
The owner or immediate family member will move into the rental unit
A resident manager will move into the rental unit
Demolition and permanent removal from the rental market
Government order
Conversion to affordable housing
Eviction Notices
All notices to terminate a tenancy for all rental units subject to
City’s Rent Stabilization Ordinance (RSO
) must be filed with the Los Angeles Housing Department (LAHD) within
three (3) business days of service on the tenant
per Los Angeles Municipal Code 151.09.C.9 & 165.05.B.5. Click
here
for more information.
Types of Evictions Requiring Payment of Tenant Relocation Assistance
No-fault evictions require the payment of
relocation assistance
.
Checklist for No-Fault Evictions
File a
Landlord Declaration of Intent to Evict
filed with the LAHD.
Give the tenant a 30-day and 60-day written notice (some evictions require 120-day notice or up to a 1-year extension).
Payment of
tenant relocation assistance
.
Keep Your Property Well-Maintained
Learn about the city’s regulations that protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents and whether your property is meeting
City standards
.
Landlord Services
We offer
services for landlords
that include workshops on the Rent Stabilization Ordinance, online bill payment, and registering a foreclosed property online, to name a few.
If My Property is Not Rent Stabilized
Even if your property is not covered under the Rent Stabilization Ordinance, you and your tenants have rights and responsibilities under the
Just Cause Ordinance
.
To Learn More About the Rent Stabilization Ordinance
View the Department’s calendar
of events for free informational workshops. By clicking here, you can
stay updated on new renter protections
. Here you can
pay your annual bill.
Bill payment has never been easier. Login to your account online and view statements, apply for exemptions, and receive email notifications. It’s that simple. Create an account today.
(Visited 364,466 times, 4,589 visits today)
Rent Control Property Overview
Rent Stabilization Ordinance
Rental Property Owners
RSO
Last modified: September 22, 2026
Comments are closed.
﻿
Supported Browsers
The Los Angeles Housing Department’s website no longer works with Internet Explorer.
We recommend switching over to
the latest versions of the browsers listed below.
• Google Chrome
• Microsoft Edge
• Mozilla Firefox
• Safari
Close
Close
Receive the latest news
Do not miss important notifications
SUBSCRIBE TO OUR NEWSLETTERS
HAVE A QUESTION?
FOLLOW US
Close
WEBSITE FEEDBACK
Feedback Form
Name
Email
*
Please enter your email, so we can follow up with you.
Select the categories for which you have feedback
*
Housing
Community Resources
Residents
Rental Property Owners
Partners
Policy & Data
How helpful was this LAHD website?
0
Feedback Topic
*
New feature
Site design/usability
Site content
Other...
Feedback Message
*
reCAPTCHA
If you are human, leave this field blank.
Submit
If you are trying to file a compliant, please
click here
Close
All Announcements :
September TEFRA
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ONMULTIFAMILY HOUSING REVENUE BONDS OR NOTESFOR
Read More About this Article »
Site Design Analysis Request for Proposals (RFP)
This RFP seeks to solicit Proposals from qualified Proposers to
Read More About this Article »
Urgent Repair Program (URP) Construction Services Request for Proposals (RFP)
LAHD is seeking proposals for the provision of Urgent Repair
Read More About this Article »
Financial Advisor Services Request for Proposals (RFP)
LAHD is seeking proposals for the provision of financial advisor
Read More About this Article »
All Announcement
Non-Profit Administrator For The ULA Protections For Tenant Harassment Legal Services Fund RFP
This Request For Proposals (RFP) is to solicit proposals from
Read More About this Article »
Rent Escrow Account Program (REAP) Notices
Rent Escrow Account Program (REAP) Tenant Outreach and Education Services Request for Proposals (RFP)
Description: LAHD is seeking proposals for qualified organizations/contractors to develop
Read More About this Article »
X