SOURCE: https://housing.lacity.gov/rso-rent-increase-calculator
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:36 UTC

﻿
RSO Rent Increase Calculator – LAHD
Skip to main content
Los Angeles Housing Department
Quick Links:
Announcements
Website Feedback
ATTN: TENANTS & LANDLORDS
Annual rent increases for rental units subject to the City of Los Angeles Rent Stabilization Ordinance (RSO), effective
July 1, 2025, through June 30, 2026
is
3%
.
Beginning February 2, 2026, a landlord can no longer include any additional percentage increase for utilities.
State law requires landlords to provide 30 days' written advance notice of rent increases of less than 10%.
For prior rent increase information, you
can
click here
.
To find out if you live in an RSO unit, go to
zimas.lacity.org
. Or, text the letters "
RSO
" to:
1(855)
880-7368
and follow the instructions (use the lowest number address on the property, for example, building
includes addresses 1722, 1724, 1726, 1728 No. Main Street, use 1722 N Main St.)
For non-RSO properties, please contact the Housing Department about allowable rent increases at: 1-866-557-7368 or
submit an inquiry 24/7 at
Ask-Housing
(housing.lacity.org/ask-housing)
, choose "rent increase" from drop down menu.
RSO RENT INCREASE CALCULATOR
* denotes a required field
Percent of Annual Allowable Rent Increase:
3%
Please enter your current rent amount before rent increase:
*
(
Amount should not include any surcharges such as SCEP $2.83, etc.)
Total New Monthly Rent Payment:
Plus Monthly RSO Surcharge Added to Rent
$1.61
Plus Monthly SCEP Surcharge Added to Rent
$2.83
Validate Message
Please answer all the questions before calculating.
Close
Calculation :
Total New Monthly Rent Payment with Allowable Rent Increase and
Surcharges:
Each year landlords may pass through to tenants the RSO and the Systematic Code Enforcement Program fee (SCEP)
surcharges with proper written notice as follows:
SCEP Pass Through Amount:
Effective January 1, 2022, the SCEP fee is a total of $67.94 per
unit which landlords may collect from tenants at a rate of $2.83 per month for 12 months each year with a proper
written notice.
RSO Pass Through Amount:
Effective January 1, 2020, the RSO fee is a total of $38.75 per unit
which landlords may collect from tenants at a rate of $1.61 per month for 12 months each year with a proper
written notice.
The SCEP and RSO surcharges are separate and in addition to the rent amount and can only be collected after the
landlord registers the units and gives written notice to the tenant.
This calculator is designed to be an informational and educational tool only. Your use of the calculator is voluntary. The City of Los Angeles does not guarantee the accuracy or reliability of any results produced by the calculator. If you use the results for any purpose, the responsibility for that use is entirely with you, the user. The City of Los Angeles is not responsible for any damages that may arise from the use of, or the inability to use the calculator, or that result from mistakes, omissions, interruptions, deletion of files, errors, defects, delays in operation, or transmission, or any failure of performance.
﻿
Supported Browsers
The Los Angeles Housing Department’s website no longer works with Internet Explorer.
We recommend switching over to
the latest versions of the browsers listed below.
• Google Chrome
• Microsoft Edge
• Mozilla Firefox
• Safari
Close
Close
Receive the latest news
Do not miss important notifications
SUBSCRIBE TO OUR NEWSLETTERS
HAVE A QUESTION?
FOLLOW US
Close
WEBSITE FEEDBACK
Feedback Form
Name
Email
*
Please enter your email, so we can follow up with you.
Select the categories for which you have feedback
*
Housing
Community Resources
Residents
Rental Property Owners
Partners
Policy & Data
How helpful was this LAHD website?
0
Feedback Topic
*
New feature
Site design/usability
Site content
Other...
Feedback Message
*
reCAPTCHA
If you are human, leave this field blank.
Submit
If you are trying to file a compliant, please
click here
Close
All Announcements :
September TEFRA
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ONMULTIFAMILY HOUSING REVENUE BONDS OR NOTESFOR
Read More About this Article »
Site Design Analysis Request for Proposals (RFP)
This RFP seeks to solicit Proposals from qualified Proposers to
Read More About this Article »
Urgent Repair Program (URP) Construction Services Request for Proposals (RFP)
LAHD is seeking proposals for the provision of Urgent Repair
Read More About this Article »
Financial Advisor Services Request for Proposals (RFP)
LAHD is seeking proposals for the provision of financial advisor
Read More About this Article »
All Announcement
Non-Profit Administrator For The ULA Protections For Tenant Harassment Legal Services Fund RFP
This Request For Proposals (RFP) is to solicit proposals from
Read More About this Article »
Rent Escrow Account Program (REAP) Notices
Rent Escrow Account Program (REAP) Tenant Outreach and Education Services Request for Proposals (RFP)
Description: LAHD is seeking proposals for qualified organizations/contractors to develop
Read More About this Article »
X