SOURCE: https://housing.lacity.gov/wp-content/uploads/2026/08/Relocation-Assistance-Bulletins-A-and-B-Combined.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:36 UTC

A. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
 RELOCATION ASSISTANCE 
 No-Fault Evictions Under the RSO & JCO 
All tenant not- at-fault evictions require payment of relocation assistance and the filing of a 
Declaration of Intent to Evict form with the Los Angeles Housing Department (LAHD) before 
evicting tenants from units covered by the Rent Stabilization Ordinance (RSO) or the Just Cause 
Ordinance (JCO). Failure to file the Landlord Declaration with the LAHD makes the eviction a 
violation of the RSO or JCO. Notices to terminate tenancy can only be served on the tenant after 
the landlord files the Declaration with LAHD, and a copy of the notice must be filed with LAHD 
no later than 3 days after it is served. To file a copy, go to housing.lacity.gov/eviction-notices. 
 Not-At-Fault Reasons for Eviction
1. The landlord evicts for the occupancy of her/himself, spouse, grandchildren, children,  
parents or grandparents, or a resident manager (Los Angeles Municipal Code (LAMC)  
151.09.A.8, 165.03.H.). Evictions for the purpose of resident manager occupancy are 
allowed only if required by law or an affordable housing covenant, or a regulatory  
agreement. Landlords must comply with the restrictions and requirements of LAMC Section  
151.30.
2. The landlord seeks in good faith to recover possession of the rental unit to demolish, convert 
to a commercial use, or remove it from rental housing use (LAMC 151.09.A.10, 165.03.I). For 
RSO units, these are considered Ellis Act (California Government Code 7060.4) evictions, and 
the landlord must comply with the requirements of LAMC 151.22-151.28.
3. The landlord evicts to comply with a governmental agency’s Order to Vacate (LAMC  
151.09.A.11, 165.03.J.). Prior to giving notice to tenants, landlords must file a Landlord  
Declaration of Intent to Evict.
4. The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development is both the owner and plaintiff and seeks 
to recover possession to vacate the property prior to sale (LAMC 151.09.A.12, 165.03.K.).
5. Residential Hotel Unit conversion or demolition (LAMC 151.09.A.13, 165.03.L.).
6. The landlord seeks to recover possession of the rental unit to convert the subject property 
to an affordable housing accommodation (LAMC 151.09.A.14, 165.03.M.).
7. The landlord demolishes the property or converts the use of the property to condominiums, 
stock cooperatives, community apartment projects, hotels, and commercial uses, regardless 
of whether the property is subject to the RSO OR JCO (LAMC 47.06 & 47.07). 
A. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
How Much Relocation Assistance Is Required? 
The amount of relocation fees due to the tenant by the landlord depends on whether the tenant 
is an eligible or qualified tenant, the length of tenancy, and the tenant’s income. Relocation 
Assistance is paid per unit, not per tenant. 
However, if a tenant is being displaced for demolition for new  construction under the Resident 
Protections Ordinance  then  there   are   other   factors  which  are explained  in  the Relocation 
Assistance Bulletin Chart B: Demolition for New Construction under the Resident Protections. For 
relocation amounts, refer to the Relocation Assistance and the HUD Low Income Limits in the 
charts in both this bulletin and the B. Relocation Assistance Bulletin: Eviction for Demolition for 
New Construction Under the Resident Protections Ordinance. 
● Qualified tenant – A qualified tenant is any tenant who, on the date of service of the
written notice of termination is 62 years of age or older; handicapped, as defined in Section
50072 of the California Health and Safety Code, or disabled, as defined in Title 42 of the
United States Code, Section 423; or who has one or more minor dependent children (as
determined for federal income tax purposes).
● Eligible tenant – Unless a tenant is a  qualified tenant as explained above, the tenant is  an
eligible tenant and is entitled to receive a relocation assistance amount that depends on
length of time in the unit and income.
● Low Income Tenant – A tenant whose income is 80 percent or less of the Area Median In- 
come, as adjusted for household  size,  as defined by the  U.S. Department of  Housing  and
Urban Development, regardless of the length of tenancy.
● Mom and Pop properties may pay reduced relocation assistance payments to their tenants
for a good faith eviction for occupancy by the owner or eligible relative, provided that
requirements  in Section 151.30 of the LAMC are met.  This applies only for evictions  for
occupancy by owner, family, or manager.
● Single Family Dwellings Owned by Natural Persons  When the residential real property  is
a single-family dwelling subject to the JCO and the owner is a natural person, including
natural  persons who hold properties in a trust or registered legal entity controlled by   that
natural person, who owns no more than four dwelling units and a single-family home on a
separate lot  in the City of Los Angeles: one month’s rent that was in effect when   the
landlord served the written notice to terminate the tenancy, as either a monetary payment
or credit. The Los Angeles Municipal Code Section 151.30(E) shall not apply. (LAMC
165.06.A.(6)).
● Demolition for New Construction The City’s Resident Protections Ordinance (RPO) and the
State’s Housing Crisis Act (HCA) require that ONLY lower income households (80%  AMI or
lower) being displaced for demolition of their units where the owner will replace the units
with new construction receive relocation payment consistent to the relocation benefits
required to be paid by public entities under Chapter 16 (commencing with Section 7260) of
Division 7 of Title 1 (Government Code 66300.6(b)(4)(A)). All tenants being displaced for
A. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
new construction should receive a minimum of the RSO or JCO amounts, to be increased only 
if the HCA or RPO requires it. 
The reduced fee for Mom and Pop properties applies only for evictions for occupancy by the 
owner or an eligible relative and only if all of the following conditions exist: 
1. The building containing the rental unit contains four or fewer rental units;
2. The landlord has not utilized this provision during the previous three years;
3. The landlord owns no more than four units of residential property and a single-family
home on a separate lot in the City of Los Angeles; and
4. Any eligible relative for whom the landlord is recovering possession of the rental unit does
not own residential property in the City of Los Angeles.
Chart A: Relocation Assistance Amounts 
Effective July 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027 
Tenant 
Household 
Tenants with 
Less Than 3 
Years 
Tenants with Length 
of Tenancy of 3 or 
More Years, or Low 
Income at or below 
80% AMI (Low 
Income) 
Tenants Renting 
Units in Mom & Pop 
Properties (Only 
for owner or family 
occupancy evictions) 
Single Family 
Dwelling 
owned by 
natural person 
(JCO only) 
Eligible 
Household $11,000 $14,400 $10,550 
One month’s 
rent Qualified 
Household $23,150 $27,400 $21,250 
Increases every July 1st. 
The relocation amounts above apply if a tenant is displaced for a no-fault reason described on 
page 1 of this bulletin. The amounts above do not apply if the reason for eviction is due to 
demolition of a Protected Unit for new construction and the tenant is lower-income (80% AMI or 
lower).  For  information  about  relocation  for  tenants  being  displaced  for  demolition  for  
new  construction,  please  review  the   B. Relocation  Assistance  Bulletin: Eviction for Demolition 
for New Construction Under the Resident Protections Ordinance. 
2026 HUD 
Income Limits (AMI %) 
1 Person 2 Person 3 Person 4 Person 5 Person 6 Person 7 Person 8 Person 
Low (80%) $93,300 $106,600 $119,950 $133,250 $143,900 $154,600 $165,250 $175,900 
Very Low (50%) $58,300 $66,650 $74,950 $83,300 $89,950 $96,600 $103,250 $110,000 
Extremely Low (30%) $35,000 $40,000 $45,000 $50,000 $54,000 $58,000 $62,000 $66,000 
*Income levels are typically updated in April of each year by HUD.
A. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
How and When Shall Landlords Provide Payment 
The Ordinance requires that relocation assistance payments be made as follows: 
1. The entire payment shall be made to a tenant who is the only tenant in a rental unit.
2. If two or more tenants occupy a rental unit, each tenant shall be paid an equal pro rata
share of the payment.
3. If more than one payment amount applies to a unit, the landlord pays the
higher amount for the unit.
The Ordinance requires timely relocation assistance payments as follows: 
1. Payment shall be made available within fifteen (15) days of service of the written notice of
eviction; however,
2. At the landlord's sole discretion and cost, the landlord may elect to pay the monetary
relocation benefits through an escrow account. The monies must be placed in the escrow
account within the required 15-day period. The escrow account must provide for payments to
the tenant(s) for actual relocation expenses incurred by the tenant before vacating the unit
for the following relocation expenses: first and last month’s rent; security deposit; utility
connection charges; moving expenses. Payments from the escrow account shall be made within
three (3) working days of receiving a payment request. The remaining balance of the escrow
account shall be disbursed upon certification of the vacation of the rental housing unit. (Refer
to RAC Regulations, Section 960.00).
Exemptions from Relocation Assistance Payments 
Landlords are exempt from paying relocation assistance when: 
1. Evicting a resident manager to replace him/her with another resident manager. If the
resident manager is a Manager -Tenant receiving free or reduced rent with no other
compensation, he/she may be entitled to relocation assistance. (See RAC Regulations
920.00, Managers as Tenants.)
2. They are required to evict due to hazardous conditions caused by a natural disaster ,
which is not caused by the landlord's negligence.
3. Relocation Offset: A landlord may offset the tenant's accumulated rent against any
relocation assistance, unless the relocation assistance is owed because a termination of
tenancy is required by a governmental agency order to vacate or comply with an issued
order for an unpermitted dwelling. (LAMC 151.09.G,5., 165.06.J.).
Administrative Fees Related to Relocation Assistance 
1. All landlords who file a declaration requiring relocation assistance to be provided to tenants
shall pay the Relocation Service Fee, according to the tenants' Eligible or Qualified status,
AND a Relocation Administrative Fee per rental unit.
2. All property owners who seek the  LAHD's  clearance  of  a  Planning  or  Building  and Safety
Department demolition permit shall pay a Demolition Monitoring Administrative Fee.
A. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
3. All landlords who file a declaration requiring relocation assistance to be provided to tenants
shall pay the Relocation Service Fee, according to the tenants' Eligible or Qualified status,
AND a Relocation Administrative Fee per rental unit.
4. All property owners who seek the  LAHD's  clearance  of  a  Planning  or  Building  and Safety
Department demolition permit shall pay a Demolition Monitoring Administrative Fee.
5. Requests for a hearing to appea l a decision regarding a tenant’s relocation assistance
eligibility for higher relocation assistance based on a tenant’s income, age, length of tenancy,
family status and/or disability status must be filed along with the Relocation Assistance
Dispute Resolution Fee (LAMC 151.09.G, 165.06.C.).
6. When the termination of tenancy is due to recover possession  of  the  rental unit  for use of
occupancy as a primary place of residence by the landlord, the landlord’s qualified family
member, or resident manager, the landlord shall  pay  an  administrative  fee  for  the  filing
of the application (LAMC 151.09.C.2, 165.06.F.).
Application Fees 
Effective July 1, 2026 to June 30, 2027 FE
E PER UNIT 
Relocation Service Fee for Eligible Tenants $623* 
Relocation Service Fee for Qualified Tenants $1002* 
Relocation Service Administrative Fee $86* 
Demolition Monitoring Administrative Fee $46 
Relocation Assistance Dispute Resolution Fee $300 
Residential Hotel Ordinance – Claim of Exemption $205 
Landlord Declaration for Owner, Eligible 
Relative, or Resident Manager Occupancy Filing $75 
*Increases every July 1st 
RELOCATION ASSISTANCE QUESTIONS 
Can a tenant request relocation fees and services before being served with a Notice to 
Terminate Tenancy if a tentative parcel or tract map for a condominium conversion has been 
approved? 
If the City of Los Angeles Planning Department has approved a tentative parcel or tract map for a 
condominium conversion, the tenant may elect to relocate without receiving a Notice to 
Terminate Tenancy from the landlord (LAMC  Sec.  47.06.D.2).  The landlord is still responsible for 
the payment of relocation assistance in these cases. 
How and where does an owner establish an escrow account, if they choose to do so? 
The landlord may place the escrow account in any bank, savings and loan association, or credit 
union with federal deposit insurance, or with any broker who is licensed by the California 
Corporate Commission, or with a client trust account of an attorney currently eligible to practice 
law in California pursuant to the records of the State Bar of California that is reasonably accessible 
to the tenant(s) during regular business hours. (RAC Regulations, Section 960.00.)
A. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
What are the tenant’s remedies if the owner does not pay relocation assistance? 
Non-payment Dispute - In an action by the landlord to recover possession of a rental unit, the 
tenant may raise as an affirmative defense the failure of the landlord to provide relocation 
assistance. A tenant may file a complaint with LAHD online at    
https://housing.lacity.gov/residents/file-a-rso-complaint or call the general hotline at (866) 557- 
7368. A tenant may seek a private right of action by obtaining legal advice. 
Escrow Account Dispute - Where there is an escrow dispute between the escrow account holder, 
tenant, and owner about the release of deposited funds, a dispute notice must be sent to the LAHD 
by the escrow holder. A copy of the escrow instructions given to the tenant must accompany the 
notice. (RAC Regulations, Section 967.00.) 
THIS INFORMATION IS OFFERED FREE OF CHARGE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC. 
While this publication is designed to provide accurate and current information about the law, readers 
should consult an attorney o r other expert for advice in particular cases, and should also read the 
relevant statute s and court decision s when relying on cited material. Law s and guideline s are 
frequently amended. The LAHD recommend s that you verify information in the event that new 
changes are not yet reflected in thi s publication. The LAH D does not assume and hereby disclaims 
any liability to any party for any loss, damage, or disruption caused by errors or omissions, whether 
such errors or omissions result from negligence, accident, or any other cause. 
A UXILIARY  AIDS AND SERVICES: “As  a covered  entity under Title II of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act, the City of Los Angeles does not discriminate on the basis of disability and, upon 
request, will provide reasonable accommodation to ensure equal access to its programs, services and 
activities.” 
#33A – 07/01/2026
B. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
REL
OCATION ASSISTANCE 
Eviction for Demolition for New Construction Under 
the Resident Protections Ordinance 
A landlord terminating a tenancy to demolish for new construction is required to pay relocation 
assistance and to file a Declaration of Intent to Evict or Notice of Intent to Withdraw Units From Rental 
Housing Use with the Los Angeles Housing Department (LAHD) prior to evicting tenants from units 
covered by the Rent Stabilization Ordinance (RSO) or the Just Cause Ordinance (JCO).  
Requirements for Landlords 
To terminate tenancy for the purpose of demolition of a Protected Unit1, a landlord must: 
1. File with LAHD a Declaration of Intent to Evict for units regulated by the JCO per the Los Angeles
Municipal Code (LAMC) Section 165.03.I(1) or file with LAHD a  Notice of Intent to Withdraw Units
From Rental Housing Use for units regulated by the RSO.  Only RSO units are subject to the Ellis
Act provisions (LAMC 151.22-151.28).  All RSO units are Protected Units.
2. Serve tenants with a written notice to move out and file a copy of it with LAHD within 3 business
days online at https://lahd.service-now.com/efs. For more information go to
housing.lacity.gov/eviction-notices
3. Pay relocation assistance to tenants in compliance with the State law’s Housing Crisis Act
(California Government Code Section 66300 et seq.) or the City laws, whichever is higher.  City
laws require all tenants be paid relocation assistance in the amounts required by the RSO or JCO
within 15 days of serving a notice to terminate tenancy, which must be enhanced for lower income
tenants if the project is subject to the Resident Protections Ordinance (RPO), effective 2/11/2025
under Ordinances # 188481 and #188482.  The RSO and JCO amounts must also be enhanced for
lower income tenants under the HCA regardless of the RPO applicability.  Parties are encouraged
to seek legal advice to understand the HCA State law if the RPO does not apply to them.
*The regular RSO or JCO relocation rules apply as described in the A. Relocation Assistance
Bulletin: No-Fault Evictions Under the RSO & JCO if the units to be demolished are not Protected
Units or are not occupied by a lower income tenant.
1 Protected Units: (1) Residential dwelling units that are or were subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts 
rents to levels affordable to persons and families of lower or very low income within the past five years. (2) Residential 
dwelling units that are or were subject to any form of rent or price control through a public entity's valid exercise of its police 
power within the past five years.  This includes all RSO units. (3) Residential dwelling units that are or were rented by lower or 
very low income households within the past five years. (4) Residential dwelling units that were withdrawn from rent or lease in 
accordance the Ellis Act within the past 10 years. 
Rev 07.01.2026 
1 
An Equal Opportunity Employer 
(866) 557-RENT [7368] HOUSING.LACITY.ORG
B. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
Rev 07.01.2026
2 
An Equal Opportunity Employer 
(866) 557-RENT [7368] HOU
SING.LACITY.ORG
Resident Protections Ordinance (RPO) 
The Housing Crisis Act of 2019 (HCA) originally introduced replacement requirements and occupant 
protections through Senate Bill (SB) 330 and has since been updated by SB 8 and Assembly Bill (AB) 1218. 
On February 11, 2025, the Los Angeles City Council adopted the RPO which codified and expanded upon 
replacement requirements and occupant protections of the HCA, and enhanced requirements for 
Restricted Affordable Units.  The RPO only applies to Protected Units that will be demolished for the 
purpose of new construction.  
The RPO’s occupant protections include: 1) Right to Relocation, 2) Right to Remain in the unit up to 6 
months prior to start of construction activities, which includes a 6-month notice to move out, 3) Right 
to Return to the same unit if the demolition does not proceed, 4) Right of First Refusal to the new 
building for some tenants and 5) Tenant Notification Requirements.  For more details, please go the Los 
Angeles City Planning Department’s website https://planning.lacity.gov/ and review the Fact Sheet: 
Replacement Unit Requirements and Occupant Protections.  
Relocation Options Under the RPO 
Owners who demolish a Protected Unit for the purpose of new construction within 5 years after the 
filing of the Notice of Intent to Withdraw or Declaration of Intent to Evict with LAHD are required to 
comply with relocation requirements under the RPO. Failure to comply with the RPO may result in 
financial penalties starting at $250,000 per displaced unit and withholding of LAHD permit clearances.  
Owners have 3 relocation options to comply with the RPO relocation rules. The owner chooses one of 
the options. The owner must pay the highest of the applicable relocation amounts to comply with State 
and City laws.  
Option 1: Standardized Payment 
Under Option 1, the City’s Relocation Consultant handles the entire relocation determination 
amount process and provides relocation services to tenants. Option 1 has predictable relocation 
consultant services fees for owners and predictable relocation payments to lower income 
households at the amounts in Chart B per RPO. The households that are above low income are paid 
relocation under Chart A. The City Relocation Consultant service fees charged to the owner for 
relocation services are paid upfront to LAHD by the owner (See the APPLICATION RELOCATION 
SERVICES FEES CHART on page 6). 
CHART A: RSO or JCO Amounts for Households Above Low 
Income Effective July 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027 *
Household Type 
Tenancy Length 
Less than 3 Years 
Tenancy Length 
3 Years or More 
Eligible Tenant $11,000 $14,400 
Qualified Tenant $23,150 $27,400 
B. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
Rev 07.01.2026
3 
An Equal Opportunity Employer 
(866) 557-RENT [7368] HOUSIN
G.LACITY.ORG
*Single Family Dwellings that are not lower income may be entitled to one month’s equivalent
of rent for relocation payment depending on various factors. See page 5.
CHART B: Resident Protections Ordinance Standardized Payments 
(Only for Low, Very Low and Extremely Low Income Households) 
Effective July 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027 (Increases July 1st) 
Household Type 
Extremely Low 
Income 
Very Low 
Income Low Income Above Low Income 
Tenants Displaced by 
New Development $115,480 $96,750 $87,450
See Cha
rt A (RSO or 
JCO amounts) 
Option 2: Comparable Replacement Unit & RSO/JCO Relocation 
For Option 2, the owner must provide a letter from the LAHD Housing Development Bureau 
approving the comparable replacement unit in compliance with State law at the time of filing with 
LAHD. If the owner does not have the approval letter, then they may choose Option 1 or 3 to 
proceed with the filing of the Notice of Intent to Withdraw or the Declaration of Intent to Evict. 
Additionally, the owner must comply with the RSO or JCO relocation requirements in Chart A. 
Option 2 has unpredictable relocation consultant services fees to find a comparable replacement 
unit, but the relocation payments are predictable and set to the amounts in Chart A. The City 
Relocation Consultant service fees charged to the owner for relocation services are paid upfront to 
LAHD (See the APPLICATION RELOCATION SERVICES FEES). For questions about Option 2, send an 
inquiry to the Housing Development Bureau using the Ask Housing App at 
https://housing.lacity.gov/ask-housing 
CHART A: RSO or JCO Amounts  
Effective July 1, 2026 through June 30, 2027 (Increases July 1st) 
Household Type Less than 3 Years 
3 or More Years or Low 
Income 
Eligible Tenant $11,000 $14,400 
Qualified Tenant $23,150 $27,400 
*Single Family Dwellings that are not lower income may be entitled to one month’s
equivalent of rent for relocation payment depending on various factors. See page 5.
2026 HUD
Income Limits (AMI %) 
1 Person 2 Person 3 Person 4 Person 5 Person 6 Person 7 Person 8 Person 
Low (80%) $93,300 $106,600 $119,950 $133,250 $143,900 $154,600 $165,250 $175,900
Very Low (50%) $58,300 $66,650 $74,950 $83,300 $89,950 $96,600 $103,250 $110,000
Extremely Low (30%) $35,000 $40,000 $45,000 $50,000 $54,000 $58,000 $62,000 $66,000
*Income levels are typically updated in April of each year by HUD.
B. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
Rev 07.01.2026
4 
An Equal Opportunity Employer 
(866) 557-RENT [7368] HOU
SING.LACITY.ORG
Option 3:  Individualized Relocation 
For Option 3, the owner must provide an approval letter from the LAHD Housing Development 
Bureau approving a relocation plan and the private relocation consultant in compliance with State 
law. If the owner does not have an approval letter, then they may choose Option 1 or 2 to proceed 
with the filing of the Notice of Intent to Withdraw or Declaration of Intent to Evict. The cost of 
hiring a private relocation consultant and the final relocation amounts for tenants are unknown 
until the end of the withdrawal process. Therefore, Option 3 has unpredictable relocation 
consultant services fees and unpredictable relocation payments for tenants.  For questions about 
Option 3, send an inquiry to the Housing Development Bureau using the Ask Housing App at 
https://housing.lacity.gov/ask-housing 
In addition to complying with relocation amounts under Option 3, the owner is required to pay 
tenants the RSO or JCO relocation amounts within 15 days of filing the Notice of Intent to 
Withdraw or the Declaration of Intent to Evict, which will be supplemented only if the owner’s 
private consultant determines it is required under State law.  The City’s Relocation Consultant 
service fees for the RSO and JCO work will be charged to the owner for relocation services are 
paid upfront to LAHD (See the APPLICATION RELOCATION SERVICES FEES).  Separately, the private 
consultant’s fees are negotiated between the owner and their consultant.  
Frequently Asked Questions 
How Much Relocation Assistance Is Required? 
The amount of relocation fees due to the tenant by the landlord depends on whether there will be a 
Protected Unit demolished for the purpose of new construction and whether household is lower income 
or above low income. For above low income tenants, it will also depend on whether tenant is an eligible 
or qualified tenant and the length of tenancy. Relocation Assistance is  paid per unit, not per tenant . 
For relocation amounts, refer to the relocation and the HUD Low Income Limits charts in this Bulletin 
on pages 2 and 3.  For relevant terminology see below. 
● Qualified tenant – A qualified tenant is any tenant who on the date of service of the written
notice of termination is 62 years of age or older; handicapped, as defined in Section 50072 of the
California Health and Safety Code, or disabled, as defined in Title 42 of the United States Code,
Section 423; or who has one or more minor dependent children (as determined for federal income
tax purposes).
● Eligible tenant – Unless a tenant is a qualified tenant as explained above, the tenant is an eligible
tenant and is entitled to receive a relocation assistance amount that depends on length of time
in the unit and income.
B. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
Rev 07.01.2026
5 
An Equal Opportunity Employer 
(866) 557-RENT [7368] HOU
SING.LACITY.ORG
● Low Income Tenant – A tenant whose income is 80 percent or less of the Area Median In- come,
as adjusted for household size, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, regardless of the length of tenancy.
● Single Family Dwellings Owned by Natural Persons When the residential real property is a
single-family dwelling subject to the JCO and the owner is a natural person, including natural
persons who hold properties in a trust or registered legal entity controlled by that natural person,
who owns no more than four dwelling units and a single-family home on a separate lot in the City
of Los Angeles: one month’s rent that was in effect when the landlord served the written notice
to terminate the tenancy, as either a monetary payment or credit. The Los Angeles Municipal
Code Section 151.30(E) shall not apply. (LAMC 165.06.A.(6)).
● Demolition for New Construction The City’s Resident Protections Ordinance (RPO) and
the State’s Housing Crisis Act (HCA) require that ONLY lower income households being
displaced for the purpose of demolition of their units where the owner will replace the
units with new construction must receive relocation payment consistent  to the
relocation benefits required to be paid by public entities pursuant to Chapter 16
(commencing with Section 7260) of Division 7 of Title 1 (Government Code
66300.6(b)(4)(A)). Tenants being displaced for new construction should receive a
minimum of the RSO or JCO amounts to be increased only if the HCA or RPO requir e
it.
How and When Shall Landlords Provide Payment? 
The City Ordinances requires that relocation assistance payments be made as follows: 
1. The entire payment shall be made to a tenant who is the only tenant in a rental unit.
2. If two or more tenants occupy a rental unit, then each tenant shall be paid an equal pro rata
share of the payment.
3. If more than one payment amount applies to a unit, the landlord pays the higher amount for
the unit.
4. Payments shall be made available within fifteen (15) days of service of the written notice of
eviction; however, the landlord may, at the landlord's sole discretion and at the landlord's cost,
elect to pay the monetary relocation benefits through an escrow account. The monies must be
placed in the escrow account within the required 15-day period. The escrow account mu st
provide for pay
ments to the tenant(s) for actual relocation expenses incurred by the tenant prior
to vacating the unit for the following relocation expenses: first and last month’s rent; security
dep
osit; utility connection charges; moving expenses. Payments from the escrow account shall
be made within three (3) working days of receiving a request for payment. The remaining balance
of the escrow account shall be disbursed upon certification of vacation of the rental housing
unit. (Refer to RAC Re
gulations, Section 960.00). Note, Option 3 under the RPO will follow State
B. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
Rev 07.01.2026
6 
An Equal Opportunity Employer 
(866) 557-RENT [7368] HOU
SING.LACITY.ORG
law relocation rules on timing of payment for any amount the owner must supplement in addition 
to the initial RSO or JCO relocation amounts. Note, relocation payment above the RSO or JCO 
amount under Option 3 is regulated by state law.  
Are There Exemptions from Relocation Assistance Payments? 
Relocation Offset: A landlord may offset the tenant's accumulated rent against any relocation 
assistance, unless the relocation assistance is owed because a termination of tenancy is required 
by a governmental agency order to vacate or comply issued for an unpermitted dwelling. (LAMC 
151.09.G,5., 165.06.J.). 
What Are the Administrative Fees Related to Relocation Assistance? 
1. All landlords who file an application which requires relocation assistance to be provided to
tenants shall pay the Relocation Service Fee, according to the tenants Eligible or Qualified status
AND a Relocation Administrative Fee per rental unit.
2. All property owners that seek the LAHD's clearance of a Planning or Building and Safety
Department demolition permit shall pay a Demolition Monitoring Administrative Fee.
3. Requests for a hearing to appeal a decision regarding a tenant’s relocation assistance eligibility
for higher relocation assistance based on a tenant’s income, age, length of tenancy, family
status and/or disability status must be filed along with the Relocation Assistance Dispute
Resolution Fee (LAMC 151.09.G, 165.06.C.).
4. Owners choosing Options 2 or 3 have less predictable costs because they hire their own private
consultant and the final relocation amounts are not known upfront for Option 3.
APPLICATION RELOCATION SERVICES FEES CHART 
Application Fees Effective July 1, 2025 to June 30, 2026 
SERVICE TYPE FEE PER UNIT 
Relocation Service Fee for Eligible Tenants $623* 
Relocation Service Fee for Qualified Tenants $1002* 
Relocation Service Administrative Fee $86* 
Demolition Monitoring Administrative Fee (paid with 
demolition permit clearance application) $46 
Relocation Assistance Dispute Resolution Fee (only if filing an 
appeal) 
$300 
*Increases July 1st 
B. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BULLETIN
Rev 07.01.2026
7 
An Equal Opportunity Employer 
(866) 557-RENT [7368] HOU
SING.LACITY.ORG
How and 
where does an owner establish an escrow account, if they choose to do so? 
The landlord may place the escrow account in any bank, savings and loan association, or credit union 
with federal deposit insurance, or with any broker who is licensed by the California Corporate 
Commission, or with a client trust account of an attorney currently eligible to practice law in California 
pursuant to the records of the State Bar of California that is reasonably accessible to the tenant(s) 
during normal business hours. (RAC Regulations, Section 960.00.) 
What are the tenant’s remedies if the owner does not pay relocation? 
Non-payment Dispute - In an action by the landlord to recover possession of a rental unit, the tenant 
may raise as an affirmative defense the failure of the landlord to provide relocation assistance. A tenant 
may file a complaint with LAHD online at https://housing.lacity.gov/residents/file-a-rso-complaint or 
call the general hotline at (866) 557-7368.  A tenant may seek a private right of action by obtaining 
legal advice.  
Escrow Account Dispute - Where there is an escrow dispute between the escrow account holder, tenant 
and owner about the release of deposited funds, a dispute notice must be sent to the LAHD by the 
escrow holder. A copy of the escrow instructions given to the tenant must accompany the notice. (RAC 
Regulations, Section 967.00.) 
THIS INFORMATION IS OFFERED FREE OF CHARGE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC. 
While this publication is designed to provide accurate and current information about the law, readers 
should consult an attorney or other expert for advice in particular cases, and should also read the 
relevant statutes and court decisions when relying on cited material. Laws and guidelines are 
frequently amended. The LAHD recommends that you verify information in the event that new changes 
are not yet reflected in this publication. The LAHD does not assume and hereby disclaims any liability 
to any party for any loss, damage, or disruption caused by errors or omissions, whether such errors 
or omissions result from negligence, accident, or any other cause. 
AUXILIARY AIDS AND SERVICES : “As a covered entity under Title II of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act, the City of Los Angeles does not discriminate on the basis of disability and, upon 
request, will provide reasonable accommodation to ensure equal access to its programs, services and 
activities.” 
#33B 