SOURCE: https://pub.njleg.gov/bills/2020/PL21/110_.HTM
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:37 UTC

P.L. 2021, c.110 (S250 3R CC CC)
CHAPTER 110
(CORRECTED COPY OF
CORRECTED COPY)
An Act
concerning the housing rights of certain persons with
criminal records and supplementing
chapter 8 of Title 46 of the Revised Statutes
.
Be It Enacted
by the Senate and General Assembly of the State of New
Jersey:
C.46:8-52  Short title.
1.    This act shall be known and may be cited as the
“Fair Chance in Housing Act.”
C.46:8-53  Findings, declarations regarding housing to those
with criminal records.
2.    The Legislature finds and declares that:
a.     Recent research indicates that New Jersey
suffers from a tragically high 36-month recidivism rate of over 30 percent;
b.    Housing instability appears to impact recidivism,
considering that over one in 10 prisoners in the United States face
homelessness upon release;
c.     Research from other states indicates a
substantial increase in the likelihood of a parolee’s arrest following each
change in address, further supporting the conclusion that when ex-convicts are
unable to find stable housing, recidivism becomes more likely and public safety
is diminished;
d.    Prior to the 1990s when popular guidance
documents began advising landlords to conduct criminal background checks on prospective
tenants, criminal background information was not widely-available and
convenient to landlords for informing rental decisions, but many landlords were
nonetheless able to maintain safe and healthy rental properties; and
e.     It is, therefore, necessary and in the public
interest for the Legislature to enact legislation for the purpose of
establishing certain housing rights of persons with criminal records.
C.46:8-54  Definitions relative to housing to those with
criminal records.
3.    As used in this act:
"Applicant" means any person considered for,
who requests to be considered for, or who requests to be considered for tenancy
within a rental dwelling unit.
“Conditional offer” means an offer to rent or lease a
rental dwelling unit to an applicant that is contingent on a subsequent inquiry
into the applicant’s criminal record, or any other eligibility criteria that
the housing provider may lawfully utilize.
“Criminal record” means
information about an individual collected by criminal justice agencies
consisting of identifiable descriptions and notations of arrests, detentions,
indictments, criminal complaints, or other formal criminal charges,
and any disposition arising therefrom, including acquittal,
sentencing, correctional supervision, release or conviction, including, but not
limited to, any sentence arising from a verdict or plea of guilty or nolo
contendere, including a sentence of incarceration, a suspended sentence, a
sentence of probation, or a sentence of conditional discharge.
“Director” means the Director of the Division on Civil
Rights.
“Division” means the Division on Civil Rights in the
Department of Law and Public Safety.
“Housing provider” means a landlord, an owner, lessor,
sublessor, assignee, or their agent, or any other person receiving or entitled
to receive rents or benefits for the use or occupancy of any rental dwelling
unit.
“Pending criminal accusation” means an existing
accusation that an individual has committed a crime, lodged by a law
enforcement agency through an indictment, information, complaint, or other
formal charge.
“Rental dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit offered
for rent by a housing provider for residential purposes,
other than a dwelling unit in an
owner-occupied premises of not more than four dwelling units.
C.46:8-55  Application process.
4.
a.  (1)
A
housing provider
shall not require an applicant to
complete any housing application that includes any inquiries regarding an
applicant’s criminal record prior to the provision of a conditional offer,
except that a housing provider may consider whether an applicant has ever been
convicted of drug-related criminal activity for the manufacture or production
of methamphetamine on the premises of federally assisted housing, and whether
the applicant is subject to a lifetime registration requirement under a State
sex offender registration program.
(2)
A housing
provider
shall not make any oral or written inquiry
regarding an applicant’s criminal record prior to making a conditional offer.
(3)
An applicant
may provide evidence to the housing
provider demonstrating inaccuracies within the applicant's criminal record or
evidence of rehabilitation or other mitigating factors.
b.
Prior to
accepting any application fee, a housing provider shall disclose in writing to
the applicant:
(1)   Whether the eligibility criteria of the housing
provider include the review and consideration of criminal history; and
(2)   A statement that the applicant, pursuant to
subsection a. of this section, may provide evidence demonstrating inaccuracies
within the applicant's criminal record or evidence of rehabilitation or other
mitigating factors.
c.     A housing provider
shall apply the standards established by this section to each applicant in a
nondiscriminatory manner.
C.46:8-56  Housing provider’s consideration of applicant’s
record.
5.    a.  A housing provider shall not, either before
or after the issuance of a conditional offer, evaluate an applicant based on
any of the following types of criminal records:
(1)   arrests or charges that have not resulted in a
criminal conviction;
(2)   expunged convictions;
(3)   convictions erased through executive pardon;
(4)   vacated and otherwise legally nullified
convictions;
(5)   juvenile adjudications of delinquency; and
(6)   records that have been sealed.
b.    After the issuance of a conditional offer to an
applicant, a housing provider may only consider a criminal record in the
applicant’s history that:
(1)   resulted in a conviction for murder, aggravated
sexual assault, kidnapping, arson, human trafficking, sexual assault in
violation of N.J.S.2C:14-2, causing or permitting a child to engage in a
prohibited sexual act or in the simulation of such an act in violation of
paragraph (3) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:24-4, or any crime that resulted in
lifetime registration in a state sex offender registry;
(2)   is for an indictable offense of the first degree
that was issued, or if the conviction resulted in a prison sentence that
sentence concluded, within the six years immediately preceding the issuance of
the conditional offer;
(3)   is for an indictable offense of the second or
third degree that was issued, or if the conviction resulted in a prison
sentence that sentence concluded, within the four years immediately preceding
the issuance of the conditional offer; or
(4)   is for an indictable offense of the fourth degree
that was issued, or if the conviction resulted in a prison sentence that
sentence concluded, within one year immediately preceding the issuance of the
conditional offer.
c.     (1)  A housing provider may withdraw a
conditional offer based on an applicant's criminal record only if the housing
provider determines, by preponderance of the evidence, that the withdrawal is
necessary to fulfill a substantial, legitimate, and nondiscriminatory interest.
(2)   If a housing provider withdraws a conditional
offer, the housing provider shall provide the applicant with written
notification that includes, with specificity, the reason or reasons for the
withdrawal of the conditional offer and an opportunity to appeal the denial by
providing evidence to the housing provider demonstrating inaccuracies within
the applicant's criminal record or evidence of rehabilitation or other
mitigating factors.
(3)   The housing provider shall perform an
individualized assessment of the application in light of the following factors:
(a)   the nature and severity of the criminal offense;
(b)   the age of the applicant at the time of the
occurrence of the criminal offense;
(c)   the time which has elapsed since the occurrence
of the criminal offense;
(d)   any information produced by the applicant, or
produced on the applicant's behalf, in regard to the applicant's rehabilitation
and good conduct since the occurrence of the criminal offense;
(e)   the degree to which the criminal offense, if it
reoccurred, would negatively impact the safety of the housing provider's other
tenants or property; and
(f)   whether the criminal offense occurred on or was
connected to property that was rented or leased by the applicant.
d.    (1)  The applicant may request, within 30 days
after the housing provider's notice of the withdrawal, that the housing
provider afford the applicant a copy of all information that the housing
provider relied upon in considering the applicant, including criminal records.
(2)   A housing provider shall provide the information
requested under paragraph (1) of this subsection, free of charge, within l0
days after receipt of a timely request.
C.46:8-57  Director preparation of model documents.
6.
a.  The director shall prepare:
(1)
a model disclosure statement as indicated in subsection b.
of section 4 of this act which provides notice that a housing provider intends
to review and consider a person’s criminal record in determining eligibility
for housing or in taking any other adverse housing action against that person.
The statement shall also provide an explanation of the criminal records that
may be considered and the manner in which they may be considered, in accordance
with the provisions of section 5 of this act.  The statement shall also notify
the person of the right to dispute, within 10 days of receiving such statement,
the relevance and accuracy of the criminal record and to offer evidence of any
mitigating facts or circumstances, including but not limited to the person’s
rehabilitation and good conduct since the criminal offense in question; and
(2)
a model notice that provides notice that a housing provider
has withdrawn a conditional offer or taken an adverse housing action based on a
person’s criminal record, provides space for the housing provider to identify
with specificity the reason or reasons for withdrawing the conditional offer or
taking the adverse housing action.  The notification form shall also notify the
person of the right to request from the housing provider a copy of all
information upon which the housing provider relied in reaching its decision,
including criminal records, and of the right to file a complaint with the
division, as well as the applicable statute of limitations, and shall include
such other additional information as the director deems appropriate.
b.
The model documents prepared pursuant to this section shall
be made available on the division’s Internet website, at no cost, and shall be
in English, Spanish, and in any other language the director deems appropriate.
C.46:8-58  Discriminatory advertisement by house provider,
prohibited.
7.    a.  A housing provider shall not knowingly or
purposefully publish, or cause to be published, any housing advertisement that
explicitly provides that the housing provider will not consider any applicant
who has been arrested or convicted of one or more crimes or offenses, except
for
drug-related criminal activity for the
manufacture or production of methamphetamine on the premises of federally
assisted housing, and whether the applicant is subject to a lifetime
registration requirement under a State sex offender registration program.
b.    A housing provider
shall not print, publish, circulate, issue, display, post, or mail, or cause to
be printed, published, circulated, issued, displayed, posted or mailed any
statement, advertisement, publication or sign, or use any form of application
for the rental, lease, or sublease of any real property or part or portion
thereof or make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective
rental, lease, or sublease of any real property or part or portion thereof
which expresses, directly or indirectly, any unlawful limitation, specification
or discrimination as to criminal record, except as permitted by this act and
for drug-related criminal activity for the manufacture or production of
methamphetamine on the premises of federally assisted housing, and whether the
applicant is subject to a lifetime registration requirement under a State sex
offender registration program.
c.     Unless otherwise
required by law, a housing provider shall not:
(1)   distribute or
disseminate an applicant’s criminal record to any person who is not expected to
use the criminal record for the purpose of evaluating the applicant in a manner
consistent with this act; or
(2)   use an applicant’s
criminal record for a purpose that is not consistent with this act
.
C.46:8-59  Immunity.
8.    a.  To encourage residential landlords to provide
housing opportunities to formerly incarcerated individuals, landlords subject
to the provisions of
this act
shall be immune
from liability in any civil action arising as a result of the landlord’s
decision to rent to individuals with a criminal record or who were otherwise
convicted of a criminal offense, or as a result of a landlord’s decision to not
engage in a criminal background screening.
b.    Nothing in subsection a. of this section shall be
construed to affect in any way the immunity from liability conferred by law
upon a landlord who rents an apartment to a person with a conviction for
murder, aggravated sexual assault, kidnapping, arson, human trafficking, sexual
assault in violation of N.J.S.2C:14-2, causing or permitting a child to engage
in a prohibited sexual act or in the simulation of such an act in violation of
paragraph (3) of subsection b. of N.J.S.2C:24-4, or any crime that resulted in
lifetime registration in a state sex offender registry.
C.46:8-60  Drug, alcohol test, drug abuse treatment
information; requirement by housing provider, prohibited.
9.    A housing provider shall not require an applicant
to submit to a drug or alcohol test, or request the applicant’s consent to
obtain information from a drug abuse treatment facility.
C.46:8-61  Unlawful acts by housing provider.
10.  A person shall not interfere with, restrain, or
deny the exercise of, or the attempt to exercise, any right protected under
this act.  If the division determines that a housing provider has engaged in
one or more unlawful actions against a person with the intent of retaliating
for the person’s filing of an action against the housing provider pursuant to
section 12 of this act, then each unlawful retaliatory action shall be
enforced, pursuant to section 12 of this act, as a separate and distinct
violation of this act.
C.46:8-62  Complaint data maintenance.
11.  The division shall maintain data on the number of
complaints filed pursuant to this act, demographic information on the
complainants, the identity of the housing providers, the number of
investigations conducted, and the disposition of every complaint and
investigation.  The division shall annually publish and post on the division’s
Internet website, information on substantiated complaints that have resulted in
the issuance of a monetary penalty pursuant to section 12 of this act.  The
division shall not publish on the division’s Internet website information
regarding any complaint against a housing provider for which the housing
provider is in good faith compliance with the requirements made by the director
pursuant to subsection a. of section 12 of this act.
C.46:8-63  Complaints, actions sought against housing
provider.
12.  a.  An action that alleges a violation of this act
shall not be initiated by any person in court.  The director, or an applicant
or prospective applicant who believes that a housing provider has violated a
provision of this act with respect to that applicant or prospective applicant,
may file a complaint with the division.  Upon the filing of a complaint by a
person other than the director, the division shall make a good faith effort to
notify the housing provider of the alleged violation and offer the housing
provider the opportunity to mediate and address the complaint within 14 days of
receiving the notice.  The division shall not subject a housing provider to any
penalty pursuant to subsection c. of this section if the complaint is addressed
pursuant to the process identified in this subsection.
b.    If the complaint is not resolved in accordance
with subsection a. of this section, and the division determines following an
investigation that the complaint is substantiated, the director shall issue a
monetary penalty against the housing provider and may require the housing
provider to take one or more of the actions authorized by subsection d. of this
section.
(1)   A housing provider may appeal a final decision by
the director issued pursuant to this section to the Appellate Division of the
Superior Court.
(2)   A complainant may appeal, to the Appellate
Division of the Superior Court, a finding by the director following an
investigation that the complaint is not substantiated, but the complainant may
not appeal a decision by the director not to investigate a complaint.
c.     A housing provider who violates a provision of
this act shall be liable for the following applicable penalties:
(1)   an amount not to exceed $1,000 if the housing
provider has not committed any prior violation within the five-year period
ending on the date of the filing of the charge;
(2)   an amount not to exceed $5,000 if the housing
provider has committed one other violation within the five-year period ending
on the date of the filing of the charge; and
(3)   an amount not to exceed $10,000 if the housing
provider has committed two or more other violations within the seven-year
period ending on the date of the filing of the charge.
d.    The director is authorized to require a housing
provider to take one or more of the following actions upon a finding that the
housing provider has violated a provision of this act:
(1)   The director may require a housing provider to
cease and desist from continuing to violate this act; to communicate in writing
to the housing provider’s employees and agents their obligations under this
act; and to report to the director on the manner of compliance for a period not
to exceed two years provided that the housing provider does not commit future
violations of the act;
(2)   If a housing provider has committed at least one
other violation of this act within the preceding five-year period, the director
may require the housing provider to make a good faith effort to remedy the
violation with respect to the applicant when a remedy is possible, by issuing a
conditional offer, if the violation has resulted in a failure to issue a
conditional offer, or by providing the same or a similar rental dwelling unit
to the applicant on the same terms as the prior conditional offer if the same
or a similar rental dwelling unit is currently or will become available, if the
violation has resulted in the withdrawal of a conditional offer.
Notwithstanding any provision of the Anti-Eviction Act, P.L.1974, c.49
(C.2A:18-61.1 et seq.) to the contrary, if an appeal by a
housing provider is successful, and the court overturns a final decision of the
director that resulted in an order under this paragraph, then a determination
that the housing provider did not violate the provisions of this act as evidenced
by such successful appeal shall be grounds for the housing provider to evict
the former applicant if that person resides in a rental dwelling unit owned by
the housing provider as the result of the director’s order, so long as the
housing provider provides the applicant with at least 45 days’ notice prior to
the eviction;
(3)   Unless housing is provided to the applicant
pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the director may require that the
applicant’s rental application fee be returned; and
(4)   The director may require that a portion of the
sum owed by the housing provider pursuant to subsection c. of this section be
paid to the applicant in an amount not to exceed $1,000.
e.     Nothing herein contained shall bar, exclude or
otherwise affect any right or action which may exist independently of any right
or action created herein, including but not limited to any right or action
under P.L.1945, c.169 (C.10:5-1 et seq.).
C.46:8-64  Rules, regulations.
13.  In accordance with the "Administrative
Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), the director shall
adopt the rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
act on or before the first day of the fifth month next following enactment.
14.  This act shall take effect on the first day of the
seventh month next following the date of enactment,
but the
division
may take any anticipatory
administrative action in advance as shall be necessary for the implementation
of this act.
Approved June 18, 2021.