SOURCE: https://www.nj.gov/oag/dcr/downloads/kyrhousing02.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:37 UTC

The Department of Law & Public Safety, through 
its Division on Civil Rights, is responsible for 
enforcing the law. To file a complaint, contact or 
visit the office nearest you:
South Shore Regional Office: 
1325 Boardwalk,  
Tennessee Ave. & Boardwalk 
Atlantic City, NJ 08401 
Phone: (609) 441-3100 
Fax: (609) 441-3578
Southern Regional Office: 
5 Executive Campus, Suite 107  
Cherry Hill, NJ 08034 
Phone: (856) 486-4080
Northern Regional Office: 
31 Clinton Street, Newark, NJ 07102 
Phone: (973) 648-2700 
Fax: (973) 648-4405
Central Regional Office: 
140 East Front Street / P.O. Box 090 
Trenton, NJ 08625-0090 
Phone: (609) 292-4605  
Fax: (609) 984-3812
Visit our web site at  
www.NJCivilRights.gov
rev. ep. 06.18.15
NJ Office of the Attorney General
NJ Office of the Attorney General
• A landlord must permit a tenant with a disability to
make reasonable modifications to the existing premises
at the tenant’s own expense, if such modifications are
necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the
premises.
4. What types of property does this apply to?
The provisions of the LAD apply to the sale or rental of all
property including open land, whether for business or
residential purposes, with the following exceptions:
• The rental of a single apartment or flat in a two-family
dwelling, the other occupancy unit of which is occupied
by the owner as his/her residence at the time of such
rentals;
• The rental of a room or rooms to another person or
persons by the owner or occupant of a one-family
dwelling occupied by him/her as his/her residence at
the time of such rental;
• In the sale, lease or rental of real property, preference
given to persons of the same religion by a religious
organization; and
• The prohibition against discrimination on the basis of
familial status does not apply to housing for older
persons (as defined in the LAD at N.J.S.A. 10:5-5mm).
5. What can I do if I believe my rights have been violated
under these laws?
You may file a complaint with us for free within 180 days
of the date of the alleged violation. The complaint must
be filed at one of our offices (check the back of this
brochure for the location nearest you). You may also file
a complaint in New Jersey Superior Court within two
years of the alleged violation.
Note: This office does not handle ordinary landlord-
tenant disputes concerning evictions, etc.
6. How is a complaint handled by the Division?
When you file a complaint with the Division, your complaint
is assigned to a Division investigator. The Division
investigator serves the complaint to the individual and/or
entity (respondent) alleged to have discriminated against
1. What does the Division on Civil Rights enforce?
The Division on Civil Rights enforces the New Jersey
Law Against Discrimination.
2. What does the NJ Law Against Discrimination
prohibit?
The NJ Law Against Discrimination (LAD) prohibits
discrimination on the bases of race, creed (religion),
color, national origin, sex, gender identity or expression,
marital status, civil union status, ancestry, actual or
perceived physical or mental disability, nationality,
affectional or sexual orientation, familial status, and
domestic partner status. “ Familial status ” means
families with a child or children under 18 years old and/
or pregnant women, and “ disability” is used to include
persons afflicted with AIDS or HIV or thought to be
afflicted with AIDS.
The LAD also prohibits housing discrimination  based
on the source of lawful income or source of lawful rent
or mortgage payment a tenant or purchaser uses. This
means, for example, that a landlord cannot deny the
lawful recipient of a Section 8 HUD voucher the right to
rent an apartment based solely on that source of lawful
income.
3. What does this mean to me?
• All persons, regardless of their membership in one
of the protected classes stated above or source of
lawful income used for rent or mortgage payments,
are entitled to equal treatment in the terms,
conditions or privileges of the sale or rental of
any real property  (e.g., it is illegal to deny that
housing is available for inspection, sale or rent when
it really is available.);
• No discriminatory advertising  of any kind relating
to the proposed sale or rental is permitted;
• Any provision in any lease or rental agreement
prohibiting maintenance of a pet or pets on the
premises is not applicable to a service or guide dog
owned by a disabled, blind or deaf tenant;
• A landlord may not charge a tenant with a disability
an extra fee for keeping a service or guide dog; and
you or violated your rights. Within 20 days of being
served the complaint, the respondent must file an
answer. The Division also offers the parties an
opportunity to send the case to a trained mediator as
a way to provide for early dispute resolution.
The investigator assigned to your case will conduct an
investigation which may include interviews, field visits,
and the securing of rental records. Based on the
investigation, the investigator makes a
recommendation to the Division’s Director as to
whether probable cause or no probable cause exists
to believe the allegations of discrimination are true.
7. What if the Division’s investigation reaches a
Finding of Probable Cause?
If there is a finding of Probable Cause in a housing
discrimination complaint, the complainant (the person
who filed the complaint) and the respondent are
notified of the finding and are given the option of
deciding within 20 days whether they wish to proceed
with the matter in Superior Court. If either party
exercises this option, a Deputy Attorney General will
promptly file a complaint in Superior Court. If both
parties decide to continue to proceed administratively,
the Division will schedule a conciliation conference.
The purpose of the conciliation is to determine if the
respondent is interested in settling the matter without
the need for further proceedings. If the Division can
work out an agreement with the respondent and the
complainant accepts the agreement, then the matter
will be closed.
If an agreement cannot be reached, the Director will
bring the case to the Office of Administrative Law for
a hearing or non-jury trial. Either a Deputy Attorney
General will be assigned to represent the complainant
in the case or the complainant may retain private
counsel. After the hearing, the Administrative Law
Judge (ALJ) will render an initial decision which can
be accepted, modified, or rejected by the Director.
If the initial decision is accepted, the Director will
issue an order adopting the decision. If the initial
decision is rejected, the Director may reverse the
findings of the ALJ or send back the case to the ALJ
for further consideration.