SOURCE: https://pub.njleg.state.nj.us/Bills/2026/AL26/43_.HTM
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:56 UTC

P.L. 2026, c.043 (A3497 1R ACS)
Title
56
Chapter
9 (Rename)
Antitrust
Acts
§§1-7
C.56:9-20
to
56:9-26
§§8,9
Note
P.L.
2026, CHAPTER 43,
approved July 20, 2026
Assembly Committee
Substitute
(First Reprint)
for
Assembly, No. 3497
An Act
concerning residential rental property pricing and supplementing P.L.1970, c.73
(C.56:9-1 et seq.).
Be It Enacted
by the Senate and General
Assembly of the State of New Jersey:
1.    This act shall be known and may be cited as the
“Forbidding the Algorithmic Inflation of Rent (FAIR) Act.”
2.    The Legislature finds and declares that:
a.     New Jersey is in the midst of an affordable
housing crisis, as demonstrated by rental housing industry data showing median
rent for a three-bedroom apartment increasing by 35 percent in the State from
2021 through 2024 and a studio in a more urban environment such as Hoboken
increasing by 61 percent in the same timeframe.
b.    Data from the United States Census Bureau
indicates that over 50 percent of renters in New Jersey are deemed “rent
burdened,” which means an individual spends more than 30 percent of income on
rent.
c.     Recent national data indicates that landlords of
residential rental housing use property management software to collude to
restrain trade and raise residential rental housing prices, which has contributed
to recent increases in the State.
d.    Landlords engaging with the software supply
real-time prices and additional lease information to companies managing the
software, who proceed to use algorithms to fix rental prices. As a result,
competition decreases and rental prices increase.
e.     A leading property management software company
in the United States hinted at the outcome of using its software by stating on
its website that it enables landlords to “outperform the market” by up to seven
percent, with a company executive publicly stating that the software could be
responsible for rent increases of up to 14.5 percent.
f.
Property management
software companies and landlords who use algorithmic systems that serve a
coordinating function have been subject to public and private litigation for
alleged violation of existing State and federal antitrust law.
g.
Although the form of
restraint of trade has evolved, the vital role of antitrust law in maintaining
the competitive function of the free market remains.
h.    New Jersey recognizes housing as a basic human
need and endeavors to expand access to affordable housing.
3.    As used in this act:
“Affordability controls” means a restriction on rent
price established pursuant to a government program, including but not limited
to: the federal section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Homeownership Program,
authorized pursuant to Subpart M of Part 982 of Title 24 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (24 CFR 982.601 et seq.); P.L.2004, c.140 (C.52:27D-287.1 et seq.);
the “Fair Housing Act,” P.L.1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-301 et al.); any program
administered by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency; a rent
control or rent leveling ordinance; or other local, State, or federal
government housing program.
1
“
Algorithmic
device” means a device that uses one or more algorithms to process or otherwise
perform calculations of data, including, but not limited to, data concerning
rental prices, material lease terms, or occupancy levels.  An algorithmic
device does not include: (1) a spreadsheet that (a) operates without artificial
intelligence and (b) requires human analysis to process or otherwise perform
calculations of data; or (2) a database that only uses an algorithm to query
unprocessed data stored on or within that database
.
1
“Competitively
sensitive information” means nonpublic information including, but not limited
to, prices, supply levels, security deposits, ideal occupancy levels, lease
contract termination, renewal dates of residential dwelling units, or any other
material lease terms.
“Coordinating function” means:
(1)   collecting the competitively sensitive
information of two or more rental property owners for the purpose of analyzing
or processing information through the use of an algorithm or other automated
process, including by using the information to train an algorithm, where the
algorithm or other automated process is used to set or recommend rental prices,
material lease terms, or occupancy levels;
(2)   setting rental prices, material lease terms, or
occupancy levels pursuant to an underlying algorithm or other automated process
that analyzes or processes competitively sensitive information of any other
rental property owner, including by using that competitively sensitive
information to train an algorithm; or
(3)   setting for or recommending to two or more rental
property owners: rental prices, material lease terms, or occupancy levels
pursuant to the same or a substantially similar underlying algorithm or other
automated process, that facilitates parallel pricing coordination.
“Coordinating function” shall not include the following:
(1)
providing, using, or collecting competitively sensitive
information solely for the purpose of conducting
research, statistical analysis, or testing, where the competitively
sensitive information is not used in setting or recommending rental prices,
material lease terms, fees, occupancy rates or levels, or other contract terms
for current or future leases;
(2)
developing an estimated amount of rent that is
made available to the public at no cost;
(3)
the use of a real estate brokerage database that is available on
equal terms to subscribers that lists properties for rent or sale but does not:
(a) set or recommend rental prices, material lease
terms, or occupancy rates or levels; or
(b) collect competitively sensitive information to set or
recommend rental prices, material lease terms, or occupancy rates or levels; or
(4)   a government entity setting or limiting rents or
sale prices of residential property through affordability controls in
accordance with the law.
“Coordinator” means any person who operates
1
[
a software or
data analytics service
]
algorithmic revenue management software or an algorithmic device
1
that
performs a coordinating function for any rental property owner, including a
rental property owner performing a coordinating function for their own benefit.
“Coordinator” shall not include a government entity that sets or limits rents
or sale prices of residential property through affordability controls in
accordance with law.
“Nonpublic information” means information that is not
available to the public at no cost. In instances where the information is
combined with public information, all combined information shall be deemed
nonpublic information.
“Person” means, unless the context requires otherwise,
any natural person or persons, or any corporation, partnership, company, trust,
or association of persons.
“Parallel pricing coordination” means a tacit or
express agreement between two or more rental property owners to raise, change,
maintain, or manipulate pricing for the leasing of reasonably interchangeable
residential dwelling units, unless required to do so in accordance with
affordability controls.  This includes agreements between a coordinator and
multiple property owners.
1
“Rental
property owner” means a person that owns, directly or indirectly, one or more
rental residential dwelling units.  Any person that holds a controlling
interest in an entity that owns a rental residential dwelling unit shall be
deemed to constitute a single rental property owner with that entity.
1
“Residential dwelling unit” means any house, apartment,
accessory unit, or other unit intended to be used as a primary residence in the
State. “Residential dwelling unit” shall not include inpatient medical care,
licensed long-term care, or detention or correctional facilities.
“Tacit agreement” means mutual consent demonstrated
without verbal or written communication.  Mutual consent may, but need not, be
demonstrated by a pattern of conduct.
4.    It
shall be unlawful and a violation of the “New Jersey Antitrust Act,” P.L.1970,
c.73 (C.56:9-1 et seq.) for:
a.     a rental property owner, or any agent,
representative, or subcontractor thereof, to receive, subscribe to, contract
for, or otherwise exchange any form of consideration in return for the use of,
the services of a coordinator;
b.    a coordinator to facilitate a tacit or express
agreement among rental property owners that restricts competition with respect
to residential dwelling units, including by performing a coordinating
function;
c.     two or more persons to engage in
1
or
otherwise facilitate
1
parallel pricing coordination;
d.    any agent or representative of a coordinator or
subcontractor thereof to engage in parallel pricing coordination; or
e.     any person to perform a coordinating function.
5.    The provisions of this act shall not be construed
in any manner that limits the application of sections 6 through 17 of P.L.1970,
c.73 (C.56:9-6 through 9-17) to a violation of section 4 of this act.
6.    a.  This act shall not authorize or permit any
conduct already unlawful pursuant to the “New Jersey Antitrust Act,” P.L.1970,
c.73 (C.56:9-1 et seq.), or any other law, and shall be construed as in
addition to that act.
b.    A municipality shall be prohibited from enacting
an ordinance that conflicts with this act.  This subsection shall not be
construed to prohibit the enactment of ordinances explicitly authorized or
required by any other law.
7.    The Attorney General shall establish, on the
official website of the Department of Law and Public Safety, a location to
receive complaints alleging any violation or suspected violation of this act,
which requirement may be satisfied by establishing or maintaining such a
location for complaints alleging violations or suspected violations of the “New
Jersey Antitrust Act” P.L.1970, c.73 (C.56:9-1 et seq.).
8.    The Attorney General may, pursuant to the
“Administrative Procedure Act,” P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), adopt any
rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this act.
9.    This act shall take effect on the first day of
the twelfth month next following the date of enactment.
Establishes “Forbidding the Algorithmic Inflation of
Rent (FAIR) Act.”