SOURCE: https://docs.sandiego.gov/municode/municodechapter09/ch09art08division07.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:37 UTC

Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 1 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
Article 8:  Housing 
 
Division 7:  Residential Tenant Protections 
(“Tenants’ Right to Know Regulations” added 3–30–2004 by O–19269 N.S.) 
(Retitled to “Residential Tenant Protections” on 5-25-2023 by O-21647 N.S.;  
effective 6-24-2023.) 
 
§98.0701 Purpose and Intent 
The purpose and intent of this Division is to promote stability in the San Diego rental 
housing market and limit adverse impacts on displaced tenants forced to find 
replacement housing in the expensive and limited San Diego housing market. This 
Division protects the rights of tenants by requiring just cause for termination of a 
tenancy consistent with California Civil Code section 1946.2, limiting the grounds for 
termination of a tenancy, requiring greater tenant relocation assistance in specified 
circumstances, and providing additional tenant protections. The rights conferred by 
this Division are in addition to any existing rights provided to tenants by state or 
federal law.  
(“Purpose of Tenants’ Right to Know Regulations” added 3–30–2004 by 
O-19269 N.S.) 
(Retitled to “Purpose and Intent” and amended 5-25-2023 by O-21647 N.S.; effective 
6-24-2023.) 
 
§98.0702 Definitions 
For the purposes of this Division, defined terms appear in italics. The following 
definitions apply in this Division: 
Buyout agreement means an agreement where the landlord pays the tenant money or 
other consideration to vacate the residential rental property. A buyout agreement 
does not include an agreement to settle a pending unlawful detainer action. 
 
Buyout offer means any discussion or bargaining, whether oral or written, between a 
tenant and a landlord regarding the possibility of entering into a buyout agreement. A 
counteroffer by the tenant does not end discussion or bargaining of a buyout offer. 
 
Commission means the San Diego Housing Commission. 
 
Disabled means any person with a disability as defined in California Government 
Code section 12955.3, as may be amended.  
 
 
 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 2 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
Dwelling unit has the same meaning as in San Diego Municipal Code 
section 113.0103, as may be amended.  
 
Family trust means a revocable living trust or irrevocable trust in which the settlors 
and beneficiaries of the trust are persons who are related to each other as sibling, 
spouse, domestic partner, child (by blood or adoption), parent, grandparent, or 
grandchild (by blood or adoption). 
 
Landlord means an owner and any person, acting as principal or through an agent, 
who has the right to offer residential rental property for rent, and includes a 
predecessor in interest to the landlord. 
 
Lease means any lease, sublease, or agreement, written or oral, for the use and 
occupancy of residential rental property. 
Natural person includes a natural person who is a settlor or beneficiary of a family 
trust; or if the residential rental property is owned by a limited liability company or 
partnership, a natural person with a 25 percent ownership in the residential rental 
property. 
Non-profit transitional housing means temporary housing operated by a non-profit 
organization for up to 24 months with supportive services to individuals and families 
with the goal of interim stability and support to successfully move to and maintain 
permanent housing, which may cover housing costs and accompanying supportive 
services for program participants. 
Owner means a natural person that has at least a 25 percent recorded ownership 
interest in the residential rental property; a natural person who has any recorded 
ownership interest in the residential rental property if 100 percent of the recorded 
ownership is divided among owners who are related to each other as sibling, spouse, 
domestic partner, child (by blood or adoption), parent, grandparent, or grandchild (by 
blood or adoption); or a natural person whose recorded interest in the residential 
rental property is owned through a limited liability company or partnership. 
Residential rental property means any dwelling or unit that is intended for human 
habitation, including any dwelling or unit in a mobilehome park. 
Retaliation means any threat or any other adverse action against a tenant for 
exercising or attempting to exercise any right guaranteed under this Division. 
 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 3 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
Section 8 means residential rental property in which the tenant receives tenant-based 
housing assistance under Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, also 
known as the Housing Choice Voucher Program.  
 
Senior means any person 62 years old or older. 
Tenancy means the lawful right or entitlement of a tenant to continuously use or 
occupy a residential rental property for more than 30 days. A tenancy does not 
include a lease for a fixed-term of three months or less, including any extensions or 
renewals of that lease for a fixed-term of three months or less. 
Tenant means a tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, or any other natural person 
entitled to lease any residential rental property. 
(“When Tenants’ Right to Know Regulations Apply” added 3–30–2004 by 
O-19269 N.S.) 
(Retitled to “Definitions” and amended 5-25-2023 by O-21647 N.S.; effective 
6-24-2023.) 
(Amended 2-27-2024 by O-21769 N.S.; effective 3-28-2024.) 
 
§98.0703 Exemptions 
This Division shall not apply to the following types of residential rental properties or 
residential circumstances: 
(a) transient and tourist hotel occupancy as defined in California Civil Code 
section 1940(b), as may be amended; 
(b) short-term residential occupancy, as defined in and subject to Chapter 5, 
Article 10, Division 1 of this Code, as may be amended;  
 
(c) housing restricted by deed, regulatory restriction contained in an agreement 
with a government agency, or other document as affordable housing for 
persons and families of very low, low, or moderate income, as defined in 
California Health and Safety Code section 50093, as may be amended;  
(d)  housing subject to an agreement that provides housing subsidies for affordable 
housing for persons and families of very low, low, or moderate income, as 
defined in California Health and Safety Code section 50093, as may be 
amended, or comparable federal statutes. This exemption shall not include 
Section 8;  
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 4 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(e) mobilehomes subject to the Mobilehome Residency Law (California Civil 
Code sections 798-799.11), as may be amended;  
 
(f) housing accommodations in a nonprofit hospital, religious facility, extended 
care facility, licensed residential care facility for the elderly, as defined in 
California Health and Safety Code section 1569.2, as may be amended, an 
adult residential facility, as defined in Title 22, Division 6, Chapter 6 of the 
Manual of Policies and Procedures published by the California Department of 
Social Services, as may be amended, or non- profit transitional housing; 
(g) dormitories owned and operated by an institution of higher education or an 
institution offering instruction to any grade from kindergarten through 12; 
(h) residential rental property in which the tenant shares bathroom or kitchen 
facilities with the landlord who maintains their principal residence at the 
residential rental property;  
 
(i) single-family residence occupied by the landlord as the landlord’s principal 
place of residence, including both of the following:  
 
(1) a residence in which the landlord-occupant rents or leases no more 
than two bedrooms, two accessory dwelling units, or two junior 
accessory dwelling units, as defined in section 113.0103; and  
 
(2) a mobilehome. 
(j) a property containing two separate dwelling units within a single structure in 
which the landlord occupies one of the dwelling units as the landlord’s 
principal place of residence at the beginning of the tenancy, so long as the 
landlord continues in occupancy;  
 
(k) housing that has been issued a certificate of occupancy within the previous 
15 years, unless the housing is a mobilehome; and 
(l) residential rental property, including a mobilehome, that is alienable separate 
from the title to any other dwelling unit, provided that both of the following 
apply: 
(1) The landlord is not any of the following: 
(A) a real estate investment trust, as defined in California Internal 
Revenue Code section 856, as may be amended; 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 5 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(B) a corporation; 
(C) a limited liability company in which at least one member is a 
corporation; or  
 
(D) management of a mobilehome park, as defined in California 
Civil Code section 798.2, as may be amended. 
(2) The tenants have been provided written notice that the residential 
rental property is exempt from this Division using the following 
statement: 
This property is not subject to the just cause requirements of 
Chapter 9, Article 8, Division 7 of the San Diego Municipal 
Code. This property meets the requirements of San Diego 
Municipal Code section 98.0703(l) and the landlord is not any 
of the following: (1) a real estate investment trust, as defined 
by California Internal Revenue Code section 856; (2) a 
corporation; (3) a limited liability company in which at least 
one member is a corporation; or (4) management of a 
mobilehome park, as defined in California Civil Code 
section 798.2.  
 
For a tenancy existing before January 1, 2024, the notice required 
above may be provided in the lease. For a tenancy commenced or 
renewed on or after January 1, 2024, the notice required above shall be 
provided in the lease. 
(“Exemptions” added 5-25-2023 by O-21647 N.S.; effective 6-24-2023.) 
 
§98.0704 Just Cause Required for Termination of Tenancy 
A landlord shall not terminate a tenancy without just cause. For purposes of this 
Division, just cause includes at-fault just cause and no-fault just cause. 
(a) At-Fault Just Cause. At-fault just cause is any of the following: 
(1) a default in the payment of rent; 
(2) a breach of a material term of the lease, as described in California 
Code of Civil Procedure section 1161(3), as may be amended, 
including violation of a provision of the lease after being issued a 
written notice to correct the violation; 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 6 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(3) the maintaining, committing, or permitting the maintenance or 
commission of a nuisance as described in California Code of Civil 
Procedure section 1161(4), as may be amended;  
 
(4) the committing of waste as described in California Code of Civil 
Procedure section 1161(4), as may be amended; 
(5) where the tenant has a written lease that terminated on or after 
June 24, 2023 and after receiving a written request or demand from the 
landlord, the tenant refused to execute a written extension or renewal 
of the lease for a substantially similar duration and with substantially 
similar provisions, provided the terms of the extension or renewal do 
not violate this Division or any other provision of law; 
(6) criminal activity by the tenant on the residential rental property, 
including any common areas associated with the residential rental 
property; 
(7) a criminal threat, as defined in California Penal Code section 422(a), 
as may be amended, by the tenant regardless of where made directed 
at the tenant’s landlord or any other tenant of the residential rental 
property;  
 
(8) the tenant’s assignment or sublet of the residential rental property in 
violation of the tenant’s lease, as described in California Code of Civil 
Procedure section 1161(4), as may be amended;  
 
(9) the tenant’s refusal to allow the landlord to enter the residential rental 
property as authorized by California Civil Code sections 1101.5 and 
1954, as may be amended, and California Health and Safety Code 
sections 13113.7 and 17926.1, as may be amended; 
(10) the tenant’s use of the residential rental property for an unlawful 
purpose as described in California Code of Civil Procedure 
section 1161(4), as may be amended; 
(11) where the tenant is an employee, agent, or licensee of the landlord and 
the tenant fails to vacate the residential rental property after their 
termination as an employee, agent, or licensee as described in 
California Code of Civil Procedure section 1161(1), as may be 
amended; and  
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 7 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(12) when the tenant fails to deliver possession of the residential rental 
property after providing the landlord written notice as provided in 
California Civil Code section 1946, as may be amended, of the 
tenant’s intention to terminate the tenancy, or the tenant makes a 
written offer to surrender the residential rental property that is 
accepted in writing by the landlord, but fails to deliver possession at 
the time specified in that written notice as described in California 
Code of Civil Procedure section 1161(5), as may be amended. 
(b) No-Fault Just Cause. No-fault just cause is any of the following actions 
taken by the landlord in good faith, meaning the landlord acts without ulterior 
motives and with honest intent: 
(1) The owner seeks to recover possession to occupy the residential rental 
property for the owner or their spouse, domestic partner, child (by 
blood or adoption), grandchild (by blood or adoption), parent, or 
grandparent for a minimum of 12 continuous months as that person’s 
primary residence. 
(A) For leases entered into on or after June 24, 2023, section 
98.0704(b)(1) shall apply only if the tenant agrees to the 
termination in writing or if the lease expressly allows the 
owner to terminate the lease if the owner unilaterally decides 
to occupy the residential rental property for the owner or their 
spouse, domestic partner, child (by blood or adoption), 
grandchild (by blood or adoption), parent, or grandparent. 
(B) For tenancies in effect prior to June 24, 2023, the addition of a 
provision allowing the owner to terminate the lease as 
described in section 98.0704(b)(1) to a new lease, renewed 
lease, or fixed-term lease constitutes a substantially similar 
provision for the purposes of section 98.0704(a)(5). 
(C) Section 98.0704(b)(1) does not apply if the intended occupant 
occupies a rental unit on the property or if a vacancy of a 
similar unit already exists at the property.  
 
 
 
 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 8 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(D) The written notice terminating a tenancy for just cause under 
section 98.0704(b)(1) shall contain the name or names and 
relationship to the owner of the intended occupant. In addition, 
the written notice shall include notification that the tenant may 
request proof that the intended occupant is the owner or related 
to the owner. The owner shall provide tenant the proof upon 
request, which may include an operating agreement and other 
non-public documents.  
(E) Section 98.0704(b)(1) applies only if the intended occupant 
moves into the residential rental property within 90 days after 
the tenant vacates and occupies the residential rental property 
for at least 12 continuous months. 
(F) If the intended occupant does not occupy the residential rental 
property within 90 days after the tenant vacates or does not 
occupy the residential rental property for at least 12 
continuous months, the owner shall offer the residential rental 
property to the tenant who vacated it at the same rent and lease 
terms in effect at the time the tenant vacated and shall 
reimburse the tenant for reasonable moving expenses incurred 
in excess of any relocation assistance that was paid to the 
tenant in connection with the written notice terminating the 
tenancy. 
(G) If the intended occupant moves into the residential rental 
property within 90 days after the tenant vacates, but dies 
before having occupied the residential rental property as a 
primary residence for 12 continuous months, this will not be 
considered a failure to comply with section 98.0704(b)(1) or a 
violation of section 98.0704(b)(1) by the owner. 
(H) For a new tenancy commenced during the time periods in 
section 98.0704(b)(1)(E), the residential rental property shall 
be offered and rented or leased at the lawful rent in effect at the 
time any written notice of terminating a tenancy is served.  
(I) For purposes of section 98.0704(b)(1), intended occupant 
means the owner or their spouse, domestic partner, child (by 
blood or adoption), grandchild (by blood or adoption), parent, 
or grandparent. 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 9 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(2) The landlord seeks to recover possession to withdraw the residential 
rental property from the rental market. 
(3) The landlord seeks to recover possession to comply with any of the 
following:  
(A) an order issued by a government agency or court relating to 
habitability that requires vacating the residential rental 
property for at least 30 days. An order issued by a government 
agency or court relating to habitability that requires vacating 
the residential rental property for fewer than 30 days is not 
grounds to terminate a tenancy for just cause and a landlord 
may be required by applicable state or federal law to provide 
tenant relocation benefits; 
(B) an order issued by a government agency or court to vacate the 
residential rental property; or  
(C) a local ordinance that requires vacating the residential rental 
property.  
If any government agency or court determines that the tenant is at fault 
for the condition or conditions triggering the order or need to vacate 
under section 98.0704(b)(3), the tenant shall not be entitled to any 
relocation assistance provided in section 98.0706(c). 
(4) The landlord seeks to recover possession to demolish or to 
substantially remodel the residential rental property. 
(A) For purposes of section 98.0704(b)(4), substantially remodel 
means either of the following that cannot be reasonably 
accomplished in a safe manner with the tenant in place and that 
requires the tenant to vacate the residential rental property for 
at least 30 continuous days:  
 
(i) the replacement or substantial modification of any 
structural, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical system 
that requires a permit from a governmental agency; or  
(ii) the abatement of hazardous materials, including lead-
based paint, mold, or asbestos, in accordance with 
applicable federal, state, and local laws.  
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 10 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(B) For purposes of section 98.0704(b)(4), a tenant is not required 
to vacate the residential rental property on any days where a 
tenant could continue living in the residential rental property 
without violating federal, state, or local laws regarding health, 
safety, and habitability. Cosmetic improvements alone, 
including painting, decorating, and minor repairs, or other 
work that can be performed safely without having the 
residential rental property vacated, do not qualify as 
substantial remodel. 
(C) If permits are required for the demolition or substantial 
remodel of the residential rental property, landlord shall:  
(i) post at the residential rental property a copy of the 
application for the necessary permits within three 
business days of submittal of the application; and  
(ii) secure permits necessary for the demolition or 
substantial remodel of the residential rental property 
prior to issuing the written notice required in section 
98.0704(b)(4)(D). 
(D) A written notice terminating a tenancy for just cause under 
section 98.0704(b)(4) shall include all the following, certified 
under penalty of perjury: 
(i) A statement informing the tenant of the landlord’s 
intent to demolish or substantially remodel the 
residential rental property. 
(ii) The following statement: 
If the substantial remodel of your unit or demolition of 
the property as described in this notice of termination is 
not commenced or completed, the landlord must offer 
you the opportunity to re-rent your unit with a rental 
agreement containing the same terms as your most 
recent rental agreement with the landlord at the rental 
rate that was in effect at the time you vacated. You 
must notify the landlord within thirty (30) days of 
receipt of the offer to re-rent of your acceptance or 
rejection of the offer, and, if accepted, you must 
reoccupy the unit within thirty (30) days of notifying 
the landlord of your acceptance of the offer. 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 11 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(iii) A description of the substantial remodel to be 
completed with the approximate expected duration of 
the substantial remodel or, if the residential rental 
property is to be demolished, the expected date by 
which the residential rental property will be 
demolished, together with the following: 
(I) a copy of the permits necessary for the 
demolition or substantial remodel; or 
(II) only if a notice is issued under section 
98.0704(b)(4)(A)(ii) and the substantial remodel 
does not require any permit, a copy of the 
signed contract with the contractor hired by the 
landlord to complete the substantial remodel 
that reasonably details the work that will be 
undertaken to abate the hazardous materials as 
described in section 98.0704(b)(4)(A)(ii).  
(iv) A statement stating why the work cannot be reasonably 
accomplished in a safe manner with the tenant in place 
and requires the tenant to vacate the residential rental 
property for at least 30 continuous days. 
(v) A notification to tenant in compliance with section 
98.0706(b)(1)(C). 
(“Just Cause Required for Termination of Tenancy” added 5-25-2023 by 
O-21647 N.S.; effective 6-24-2023.) 
(Amended 2-27-2024 by O-21769 N.S.; effective 3-28-2024.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 12 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
§98.0705 Notice to Tenant of Residential Tenant Protections 
(a) A landlord of residential rental property subject to this Division shall provide 
written notice in no less than 12-point font to the tenant, and in a manner that 
complies with California Civil Code section 1632, as may be amended, that 
states as follows: 
California law limits the amount your rent can be increased. See 
California Civil Code section 1947.12 for more information. Local law 
also provides that a landlord shall provide a statement of cause in any 
notice to terminate a tenancy. In some circumstances, tenants who are 
seniors (62 years or older) or disabled may be entitled to additional 
tenant protections. See Chapter 9, Article 8, Division 7 of the San 
Diego Municipal Code for more information. 
 
(b) A landlord of residential rental property subject to this Division shall include 
a copy of the Tenant Protection Guide with the written notice required by 
section 98.0705(a). 
 
The Commission shall prepare and make available on the Commission’s 
website a Tenant Protection Guide, which shall include educational 
information and resources for the tenant to understand their rights under this 
Division and state law, including the rights to quiet enjoyment and habitability 
of the residential rental property. 
 
(c) For a tenancy in a residential rental property subject to this Division existing 
before June 24, 2023, the notice required by section 98.0705(a) and the 
Tenant Protection Guide required by section 98.0705(b) shall be provided to 
the tenant directly or as an addendum to the lease within 90 days of June 24, 
2023.  
(d) For a tenancy in a residential rental property subject to this Division 
commencing or renewed on or after June 24, 2023, the notice required by 
section 98.0705(a) and the Tenant Protection Guide required by 
section 98.0705(b) shall be included in the lease, or as a written notice signed 
by the tenant at the time the lease is signed, with a copy provided to the 
tenant. 
(“Notice to Tenant of Residential Tenant Protections” added 5-25-2023 by 
O-21647 N.S.; effective 6-24-2023.) 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 13 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
§98.0706 Requirements Upon Termination of Tenancy 
(a) Requirements Upon Termination of Tenancy for At-Fault Just Cause. If a 
landlord issues a termination notice for at-fault just cause, the landlord shall 
do the following:  
 
(1) Notice to Tenant. Before a landlord issues a notice to terminate a 
tenancy for at-fault just cause that is a curable lease violation, the 
landlord shall first give written notice of the violation including a 
description of the violation and an opportunity to cure the violation 
under California Code of Civil Procedure section 1161(3), as may be 
amended. If the violation is not cured within the time period in the 
notice, the landlord may terminate the tenancy without another 
opportunity to cure by serving a three-day notice to quit. 
 
(2) Notice to Commission. The landlord shall provide written notice to the 
Commission of the at-fault just cause termination of tenancy under 
section 98.0704(a) no later than three business days after the date the 
landlord provided the required notice to tenant. Section 98.0706(a)(2) 
shall not apply until 30 days after the Commission establishes a 
submission portal and provides the public notice of its creation.  
 
(b) Requirements Upon Termination of Tenancy for No-Fault Just Cause. If a 
landlord issues a termination notice for no-fault just cause, the landlord shall 
do the following: 
(1) Notice to Tenant. The landlord shall give written notice to the tenant 
at least 30 or 60 days prior to the proposed date of termination as 
required by California Civil Code section 1946.1, as may be amended, 
in no less than 12-point font. The written notice shall contain the 
following: 
(A) The landlord shall provide a description of the basis for the 
termination. 
(B) The notice shall state the tenant’s right to relocation assistance 
established in section 98.0706(c) by a direct payment to the 
tenant or rent waiver.  
 
 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 14 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(i) If the landlord elects to provide relocation assistance by 
a direct payment to the tenant, the notice shall state the 
amount of relocation assistance available to the tenant 
and that the landlord shall provide the payment within 
15 days from the date of the notice.  
(ii) If the landlord elects to provide relocation assistance by 
rent waiver, the notice shall state the amount of rent 
waived and that no rent is due for the final 
corresponding months of the tenancy. 
(C) The notice shall state the tenant’s right to receive an offer to 
renew the tenancy established in section 98.0706(d) and 
30 days to accept the offer in the event the residential rental 
property is offered again for rent or lease for residential 
purposes within five years of the date the tenant was evicted 
under sections 98.0704(b)(1), (3), or (4), and that to exercise 
such right, the tenant:   
(i) shall notify the landlord in writing within 30 days of 
the termination notice of tenant’s desire to receive an 
offer to renew the tenancy;  
(ii) provide the landlord a mailing address or email address 
for the landlord to send the offer; and  
 
(iii) provide the landlord a change of mailing address or 
email address.  
(2) Notice to Commission. The landlord shall provide written notice to the 
Commission of the no-fault just cause termination of tenancy under 
section 98.0704(b) no later than three business days after the date the 
landlord provided the required notice to tenant. Section 98.0706(b)(2) 
shall not apply until 30 days after the Commission establishes a 
submission portal and provides the public notice of its creation.   
(c) Relocation Assistance for Termination of Tenancy for No-Fault Just Cause.  
(1) The landlord shall, regardless of the tenant’s income or length of 
tenancy and at the landlord’s option, provide relocation assistance to 
the tenant by one of the following:  
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 15 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(A) The landlord shall provide a direct payment to the tenant. 
 
(i) Unless section 98.0706(c)(1)(A)(ii) applies, the direct 
payment to the tenant shall be in an amount equal to 
two months of actual rent under the tenant’s lease in 
effect at the date of the notice.  
 
(ii) If the tenant is a senior or disabled, the direct payment 
to the tenant shall be in an amount equal to three 
months of actual rent under the tenant’s lease in effect 
at the date of the notice. 
(B) The landlord shall waive, and not collect the payment by 
tenant, of any currently due or future rent under the tenant’s 
lease at the time of the notice and through the remainder of the 
tenancy in an amount equal to the applicable direct payment as 
set forth in section 98.0706(c)(1)(A). 
(2) When more than one tenant occupies the residential rental property 
and the landlord elects to provide direct payment of relocation 
assistance to the tenants, the landlord may make a single direct 
payment to all the tenants named in the lease. 
 
(3) The relocation assistance required by this Division shall not relieve the 
landlord’s obligation to, and shall be in addition to, the return of any 
deposit or security amounts owed to the tenant.  
 
(4) Any relocation assistance required by this Division shall be credited 
against any other relocation assistance required by any federal, state, 
or other local law. 
 
(5) If a tenant fails to vacate after the expiration of the notice to terminate 
the tenancy, the actual amount of any relocation assistance provided 
under this Division may be recoverable by landlord as damages in an 
action to recover possession of the residential rental property. 
(d) Additional Requirement Upon Termination of a Tenancy for No-Fault Just 
Cause.  
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 16 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
If a residential rental property is offered for rent or lease for residential 
purposes within five years of the date the tenant was evicted under 
sections 98.0704(b)(1), (3), or (4), landlord shall first offer to lease the 
residential rental property in writing to the tenant displaced from that unit by 
the no-fault just cause termination if the tenant:   
(1) advised the landlord in writing within 30 days of the termination 
notice of the tenant’s desire to receive an offer to renew the tenancy; 
and  
(2) provided the landlord a mailing address or email address for the 
landlord to send the offer, including any change of mailing address or 
email address.  
The landlord shall have the right to screen the tenant using industry accepted 
methods and shall communicate the minimum screening criteria in the written 
offer for the new tenancy. The tenant shall have 30 days from the date of 
receipt of the offer to accept. 
(e) In addition to other remedies applicable to landlord’s failure to comply with 
this Division, a landlord's failure to strictly comply with section 98.0706 shall 
render void any notice of termination required by section 98.0706. 
(“Requirements Upon Termination of Tenancy” added 5-25-2023 by O-21647 N.S.; 
effective 6-24-2023.) 
 
§98.0707 Buyout Agreements 
It is the purpose and intent of section 98.0707 to regulate buyout agreements to 
increase the fairness of buyout negotiations and agreements, to ensure that tenants 
who enter into buyout agreements are aware of their rights, and to prevent landlords 
from contracting around the legal rights and remedies available to tenants under 
existing law. 
(a) Disclosure Prior to Buyout Offers. Prior to making a buyout offer, the landlord 
shall provide each tenant in a residential rental property a written disclosure 
that shall include the following: 
(1) a statement that the tenant has a right not to enter into a buyout 
agreement; 
(2) a statement that the tenant may choose to consult with an attorney 
before entering into a buyout agreement; 
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 17 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(3) a statement that the landlord may not retaliate against the tenant for 
refusing to enter into or negotiate a buyout agreement; 
(4) a statement that all tenants of a residential rental property may refuse 
to receive future buyout offers by providing landlord written notice of 
their refusal, which shall be effective for six months, and all tenants of 
a residential rental property may rescind the refusal to receive future 
buyout offers by providing landlord written notice of the rescission; 
(5) a statement that the tenant is eligible for relocation assistance and the 
amount of the required relocation assistance in section 98.0706(c); 
(6) the names of all people authorized to discuss the buyout offer and enter 
into a buyout agreement on the landlord’s behalf; 
(7) a space for each tenant to sign and write the date the landlord 
provided the tenant with the disclosure; and 
(8) a space for the landlord to sign and write the date on which the 
landlord provided the tenant with the disclosure. 
(b) The landlord shall provide each tenant a fully executed copy of the disclosure 
form within three days of its execution and retain a copy of each signed 
disclosure form for five years, along with a record of the date the landlord 
provided the disclosure to each tenant.  
 
(c) Requirements for Buyout Agreements. The landlord shall comply with the 
following: 
(1) The buyout agreement shall be in writing. 
(2) A copy of the buyout agreement shall be given to each tenant at the 
time the tenant signs the buyout agreement. 
(3) The buyout agreement shall include the following statements in bold 
letters in at least 14-point font in close proximity to the space reserved 
for the signature of the tenant: 
(A) You, the tenant, have a right not to enter into this buyout 
agreement.  
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 18 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(B) If you, the tenant, are entitled to relocation assistance under 
federal, state, or local law, a buyout agreement for less than the 
amount of the relocation assistance to which you are entitled 
violates Chapter 9, Article 8, Division 7 of the San Diego 
Municipal Code and is void. 
(C) You, the tenant, may choose to consult with an attorney before 
signing this agreement. 
(4) If the tenant primarily negotiates the buyout agreement or lease, orally 
or in writing, in a non-English language, the landlord shall provide the 
tenant with an English and a translated version of the buyout 
agreement at the same time. 
A buyout agreement that does not strictly comply with all the requirements of 
section 98.0707(c)(1)-(4) shall be void. 
(d) Void Buyout Agreements. Buyout agreements must be for an amount that is 
greater than the amount of relocation assistance available to the tenant in 
section 98.0706(c). A buyout agreement for less than the amount of relocation 
assistance owed to the tenant violates this Division and is void. 
(e) No Waiver. The provisions of section 98.0707 may not be waived by a buyout 
agreement. Any term of a buyout agreement, lease, contract, or other 
agreement which purports to waive or limit a tenant's rights under 
section 98.0707 is contrary to public policy, unenforceable, and void. 
(“Buyout Agreements” added 5-25-2023 by O-21647 N.S.; effective 6-24-2023.)   
 
§98.0708 Retaliation Prohibited 
A landlord shall not retaliate against a tenant for exercising any right provided by 
this Division or seeking the enforcement of this Division. 
(“Retaliation Prohibited” added 5-25-2023 by O-21647 N.S.; effective 6-24-2023.) 
§98.0709 Remedies 
(a) A tenant claiming a violation of this Division may file an action against a 
landlord in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
 
(b) A tenant may seek injunctive relief, equitable relief, and money damages, 
including punitive damages, in a civil action against a landlord for a violation 
of this Division.  
Ch. Art. Div.  
9 8 7 19 
 
San Diego Municipal Code Chapter 9:  Building, Housing and Sign Regulations   
(3-2024) 
 
 
 
(c) A tenant may raise, as an affirmative defense, any violation or noncompliance 
with this Division in any action by a landlord to recover possession of a 
residential rental property. 
 
(d) Any attempt by a landlord to recover possession of a residential rental 
property or any actual recovery of possession of a residential rental property 
in violation of this Division shall render the landlord liable to the tenant in a 
civil action for wrongful eviction for damages of not less than three times the 
actual economic damages. 
 
(e) Any landlord who fails to provide relocation assistance as required by 
section 98.0706(c) shall be liable to the tenant in a civil action for not less 
than three times the required relocation assistance and actual economic 
damages. 
 
(f) In the court's discretion, a landlord who attempts to recover possession of a 
residential rental property in material violation of this Division shall be liable 
to the tenant in a civil action for reasonable attorney’s fees and costs. 
 
(g) The remedies under section 98.0709 are cumulative and may be used in 
addition to any other remedies in this Division or at law, statute, or ordinance. 
 
(h) The City may enforce this Division under Chapter 1, Article 2 of this Code, 
including civil and criminal remedies. 
(“Remedies” added 5-25-2023 by O-21647 N.S.; effective 6-24-2023.) 
(Amended 2-27-2024 by O-21769 N.S.; effective 3-28-2024.) 
 
§98.0710 Failure to Comply with Division 
In addition to other remedies applicable to landlord’s failure to comply with this 
Division, a landlord’s failure to comply with any provision of this Division shall 
render void any notice of termination required by this Division.  
(“Failure to Comply with Division” added 2-27-2024 by O-21769 N.S.; effective 
3-28-2024.) 
 