SOURCE: https://sf-hrc.org/fair-chance-ordinance
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:37 UTC

Human Rights Commission | SF.gov
Skip to main content
Agency
Human Rights Commission
Rooted in community, the Human Rights Commission works in service of the City’s anti-discrimination laws by protecting civil rights, upholding dignity, and advancing equitable outcomes in San Francisco.
This is Your City: Family Listening Series
The Human Rights Commission is proud to be an Our Children, Our Families Initiative City partner in advancing this call for engagement to all San Francisco families and youth!  All youth (ages 18 to 24) and families are encouraged to join a Family Summit (September 12 to December 12), or take the Citywide Survey (August 20 to December 31).
Link below for additional information.
This is Your City: Family Listening Series
Reports issued by the Human Rights Commission (Agency for Human Rights)
The department issues regular reports as required by the San Francisco City Charter and the San Francisco Administrative Code. Additional reports are made based on requests from the Office of the Mayor, Board of Supervisors, and the department's Commission; collaboration with other city departments and agencies; and investigations and policy analyses of local issues relevant to human and civil rights.
How to file a Sanctuary City Ordinance complaint
City employees are not allowed to help federal enforce immigration law except in very limited circumstances or when required by federal or state law. To file a complaint, contact the Human Rights Commission to schedule an intake interview; learn more at the link above.
Calendar
Full calendar
UPCOMING CALENDAR
October 03
October
03
Event
District 5 Fillmore Family Summit
Saturday, October 03, 2026
11:00 am
October 08
October
08
Event
District 9 Mission Family Summit
Thursday, October 08, 2026
5:00 pm
October 17
October
17
Event
District 8 Castro Family Summit
Saturday, October 17, 2026
1:00 pm
October 22
October
22
Event
District 1 Richmond Family Summit
Thursday, October 22, 2026
5:30 pm
PAST CALENDAR
September 30
September
30
Meeting
[ONLINE] Equity Advisory Council Meeting - September 30, 2026
Wednesday, September 30, 2026
4:00 pm
September 26
September
26
Event
District 11 OMI Family Summit
Saturday, September 26, 2026
11:00 am
News
See all news
District 6 SOMA Family Summit Summary
September 19, 2026
District 10 Sunnydale Family Summit Summary
September 17, 2026
Press release
San Francisco Launches This is Your City: 2026 Family Listening Series
August 20, 2026
Mayor Lurie Kicks Off Summer 2026 Opportunities For All, Black 2 San Francisco Internship Initiatives
June 25, 2026
Press release
City Announces New Investments and Programs to Support Fillmore's Cultural Anchors and Small Businesses
May 28, 2026
Press release
San Francisco Makes Major Investment to Strengthen Capacity of Community Nonprofits and Service Providers
May 7, 2026
Services
Commission
HRC - Commission
Up to 11 Commissioners are appointed by the Mayor to represent the diverse human rights interests of the City.
Discrimination
Civil Rights Division
Investigating and mediating discrimination complaints in housing, employment, and access to public places.
A statement of solidarity from the Human Rights Commission
HRC stands with immigrant communities.
Link here to full statement
Resources
HRC reports
All reports issued by the department are linked here.
HRC grantee resources
A comprehensive collection of resources outlining the expectations, requirements, and procedures for all HRC grantees.
HRC event sponsorship application
HRC offers limited sponsorship funding to support community events that align with our mission and values. Sponsorships are available on a biannual cycle, with varying funding amounts.
Request HRC public records
Make a request for public records from the San Francisco Human Rights Commission via this link. You may also contact HRC.PublicRecords@sfgov.org.
Grant funding opportunities with the Human Rights Commission
Grant funding opportunities with the Human Rights Commission
Human Rights Commission - Statement of Incompatible Activities
HRC's Statement of Incompatible Activities, detailing types of activities not allowed for Department staff.
Human Rights Commission Bylaws (revised May 8, 2025)
Bylaws of the Human Rights Commission of the City and County of San Francisco
Sign up for HRC e-newsletter
Keep connected with departmental news and updates via HRC's regular e-newsletter
HRC Accessibility Statement
Get help for discrimination at work
Learn what to do if you experience harassment or discrimination at work.
Get help for discrimination in housing
Housing discrimination is illegal in San Francisco. Learn what to do if you experience harassment or discrimination in your home or when applying for housing.
Know your right to access public places
There are laws to protect you from discrimination by business establishments and other places open to the public.  Learn about your rights and what to do if you experience discrimination.
Affordable housing protections for people with criminal history
San Francisco's Fair Chance Ordinance protects residents with arrest or conviction history in affordable housing decisions.
Legal resources for housing discrimination
Get legal information, advice, or representation.
Fair housing advocacy organizations
Get help with housing discrimination and reasonable accommodations for disability.
Get money to pay rent
These organizations offer rental assistance.
About
The Human Rights Commission serves the community by:
Investigating and mediating complaints of discrimination in housing, employment, and access to public spaces
Providing restorative justice and mediation for community disputes
Managing other initiatives as directed by the Mayor and Board of Supervisors
You can
follow our LinkedIn page here
, check out our other social media sites via links below,
view our SFGovTV YouTube playlist here
, or click the 'Learn more about us' button below.
To request HRC public records,
follow this link
.
To review HRC's Accessibility Statement,
please follow this link
.
To sign up for HRC's e-newsletter,
please follow this link
.
Learn more about us
division
Office of Transgender Initiatives
Commission, SFHRC
Partner agencies
Commission, SFHRC
LGBTQI+ Advisory Council
African American Reparations Advisory Committee
Close Juvenile Hall Working Group
Mawuli Tugbenyoh
Executive Director
Contact information
Address
25 Van Ness Avenue, Suite 800
San Francisco
,
CA
94102
Get directions
Phone
415-252-2500
Email
Civil Rights Division Requests and Inquiries
HRC.Info@sfgov.org
Media Requests and Inquiries
HRC.Press@sfgov.org
Public Records Requests
HRC.PublicRecords@sfgov.org
Commission Secretary and Commission Inquiries
HRC.Commission@sfgov.org
General Inquiries
HRC.Info@sfgov.org
Social media
facebook
instagram
Request public records
Submit requests
for the Human Rights Commission.
Archived website
See previous website
archived on
Thursday, June 2, 2022
.