SOURCE: https://santa-ana.gov/departments/rent-stabilization
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-01 22:37 UTC

Rent Stabilization and Just Cause Eviction - City of Santa Ana
Rent Stabilization and Just Cause Eviction
Access the Rental Registry
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ's)
Attend a Community Workshop
Get Help from Community Partners
Read the Ordinance
Appeals
Mediation Services
Get News and Updates
Contact Us
Contact
Rent Stabilization Office
(714) 667-2209
Contact us
801 W Civic Center Drive, 2nd Floor
Santa Ana, CA 92701
Monday-Friday: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Saturday-Sunday: closed
Current Maximum Allowable Rent Increase
2.87 percent is the maximum allowable rent increase for the period of September 1, 2026 through August 31, 2027.
For more information on how the maximum allowable rent increase amount is calculated,
📖 Read the Ordinance →
Rent Increase Limits
Maximum rent increase:
Your landlord can only raise your rent by a certain amount each year. The increase cannot be more than 3% of your current rent or 80% of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) change, whichever is less.
Renter Protections
Just cause evictions:
Your landlord must have a valid reason to evict you. This could be for not paying rent, breaking the lease, or if the landlord wants to move into the property themselves.
Relocation assistance:
If your landlord evicts you for certain reasons, they might have to help pay for your moving costs.
Petitions
Both landlords and tenants may submit official petitions to request rent adjustments, report violations, or contest unauthorized pass-through costs. Our impartial hearing process ensures all parties are treated fairly under the Ordinance.
How to Submit a Petition →
🧮Rent Calculator & Pass-Through Fees
Below is an informational calculator to help you assess a change in rent. If you have questions about a rent increase, contact us.
Current Rent
x 2.87%
Allowable Rent Increase Amount
Total Allowable Rent Amount
How does your new rent compare to the Total Allowable Rent Amount?
My rent increase is HIGHER than the maximum allowable rent increase
My rent increase is AT or LOWER than the maximum allowable rent increase
What can I do?
You can request a review of your rent increase by filling out the Tenant Petition below and submitting it through the contact form below.
What can I do?
Aside from requesting a review of a rent increase in excess of the maximum allowed rent increase, the Tenant Petition allows you to:
1) To request a reduction in rent based on decreased housing services
2) To request a reduction in rent based on failure of the landlord to maintain a habitable premises, including health, safety, fire, or building code violations
3)To contest a capital improvement cost as an unauthorized or excessive pass through
4) or, For any other violation of the Ordinance by the landlord
Submit
Is your landlord charging you the pass-through fee?
Yes
No
I don't know
What is the amount of the monthly pass-through fee?
x 12 months
Yearly Pass-through Fee Amount
Your landlord is charging you MORE than the allowable pass-through fee. You can request a review for this violation of the ordinance by filling out a Tenant Petition below and submitting it to us in the contact form below.
The current monthly pass-through fee is allowed by the Rent Stabilization and Just Cause Eviction Ordinance. If you have questions, please contact us through the form below.
The Rent Stabilization and Just Cause Ordinance allows, but does not require, landlords to charge the pass-through fee.
Landlords cannot charge for previous monthly installments of the pass-through fee after each monthly payment of rent.
If you have more questions, please contact us through the form below.
We can assist you with providing more information. Please contact us through the form below.
Submit
Is your landlord charging you the pass-through fee?
If a landlord charges a tenant a pass-through fee greater than $50, the landlord shall reimburse the tenant for the registration fee pass-through overpayment. The pass-through fee is charged by rental unit, not by the number of tenants in a rental unit. For example:
If Unit A has 5 tenants, the pass-through fee is $50.
If Unit B has 1 tenant, the pass-through fee is $50.
This content is for decoration only
skip decoration
.
Close window
Search Site
Search
Close window