APPROVED AS TO LEGAL FORM 
.
  
Business Administrator 
 
.
  
Corporation Counsel 
☐ Certification Required 
Ordinance of the City of Jersey City, N.J. 
File No. 
Agenda No. 
Agenda No. 
Ord. 25-057 
3.3 (1st Reading) 
4.4 (2nd Reading and Final Passage) 
 
 
ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING CHAPTER 218 (MULTIPLE DWELLINGS), IF 
THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF JERSEY CITY BY ADDING NEW SECTION 12, 
ENTITLED “PREVENTING ALGORITHMIC RENT-FIXING IN THE RENTAL HOUSING 
MARKET”  
 
COUNCIL AS A WHOLE offered and moved adoption of the following ordinance:  
 
 
Whereas, Jersey City has seen an immense amount of development over the last two decades and has seen immense 
increases in property values; 
 
Whereas, Jersey City is facing an affordability crisis with rents increasing dramatically annually and thousands of 
residents receiving eviction notices; and 
 
Whereas, across the country, including in Jersey City, landlords are using software algorithms and other information 
exchanges between competitors to raise rents, artificially constrain supply, and further exacerbate the housing crisis; 
and 
  
Whereas, corporations sell software or access to information exchanges that promises to boost landlord profits by 1) 
collecting sensitive data from landlords across regional housing markets and 2) processing sensitive data and public 
data to recommend rent increases and create artificial scarcity by leaving a certain percentage of housing units 
vacant; and 
  
Whereas, the problem is exacerbated by a trend toward consolidation primarily in local rental housing markets, as 
more units wind up in the hands of large, institutional landlords and rental property managers; and 
  
Whereas, access to affordable housing and fair and transparent rental housing prices is a critical issue for the 
residents of Jersey City; and 
 
Whereas, by adopting Preventing Algorithmic Rent Fixing in the Rental Housing Market, the city can further its 
commitment to keeping Jersey City affordable and fair. 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF JERSEY CITY THAT: 
that Chapter 218 (Fees and Charges) of the Municipal Code shall be amended by adding subsection 12 (Preventing 
Algorithmic Rent-Fixing in the Rental Housing Market) which reads as follows: 
 
§218-12 Preventing Algorithmic Rent Fixing in the Rental Housing Market: 
 
1.Definitions 
 
a.The following terms, as used in this ordinance, shall have the following meanings: 
 
i.“Coordinate” or “coordinating” mean, with respect to a service provider, collecting nonpublic competitor 
information from real estate lessors; and,  collecting of historical or contemporaneous prices, price changes, supply 
levels, occupancy rates, or lease or rental contract termination and renewal dates of residential dwelling units from 
two or more real estate lessors or from public databases; 
Page 1 of 5

Ord. 25-057 
 
Ordinance Amending and Supplementing Chapter 218 (Multiple Dwellings), if the Code of Ordinances of 
the City of Jersey City by Adding New Section 12, Entitled “Preventing Algorithmic Rent-Fixing in the 
Rental Housing Market”  
 
 
1.analyzing or processing of the information described in subparagraph (1)(a)(i) using a system, software, or process 
that uses computation; and 
 
2.Recommending to any other party rental prices, lease terms, or occupancy levels to a real estate lessorusing the 
information described in subparagraph (1)(a)(i). 
 
a.This definition exempts owners of multiple properties for actions related exclusively to multiple properties 
controlled by the same rental property owner; and 
 
3.Licensed Real Estate Agents are not included in this definition so long as they are operating in accordance with all 
applicable state regulations.  
 
ii.“Person” means any natural person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm, or association. 
 
iii.“Residential dwelling unit” means any house, apartment, accessory unit, or other unit intended to be used as a 
person’s primary residence; and does not include inpatient medical care, licensed long-term care, and detention or 
correctional facilities. 
 
iv.“Real estate lessor” means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock company, trust, or 
unincorporated organization that owns real property and leases such property or any portion thereof in the form of a 
residential dwelling unit. 
 
v.“Service provider” means any person that performs a coordination function, as defined in Section 1(a)(i)(1) of this 
Act, for any real estate lessor or rentor.  
1.Licensed Real Estate Agents are not included in this definition so long as they are operating in accordance with all 
applicable state regulations.  
 
vi.“Nonpublic Competitor Information” means information, including but not limited to prices, supply levels, 
security deposits, ideal occupancy levels, lease contract termination, renewal dates of residential dwelling units or 
any other material lease terms that is less than 365 days old and is not widely and readily available to the public at 
no cost. 
 
2.Unlawful Conduct 
 
a.It is unlawful for any real estate lessor, agent, or subcontractor thereof, to subscribe to, contract with, or otherwise 
exchange anything of value in return for the services of a Service Provider. 
 
b.No service provider shall facilitate an agreement not to compete among real estate lessors with respect to any 
aspect of residential dwelling units, including rental pricing, fees, or any other rental terms. 
 
3.Enforcement 
 
a.Public Enforcement. The Attorney General or any municipal or county attorney may bring a civil action, as parens 
patriae, in any court of competent jurisdiction, to secure relief as provided in this section for injury sustained by 
natural persons to their property by reason of a violation of this chapter. 
 
i.City administration: The Office of Landlord-Tenant Affairs and Office of Code Compliance will be empowered to 
enforce this section. 
  
1.Persons (including residents) who have evidence that a landlord is using a service provider or is in any way 
violating the terms of this section report this to the Office of Landlord/Tenant Relations, which will compile said 
complaints. 
 
2.The Office of Landlord/Tenant Relations is empowered to cooperate with the Office of Code Compliance to 
investigate such complaints or refer them for prosecution to the municipal prosecutor, Attorney General, or other 
appropriate law enforcement offices. 
 
b.Private Right of Action. Any person who is injured by a violation of this chapter may sue in any court of 
competent jurisdiction in the county where the defendant resides or is found, or any agent of the defendant resides or 
is found, or where service may be obtained, without respect to the amount in controversy. 
Page 2 of 5

Ord. 25-057 
 
Ordinance Amending and Supplementing Chapter 218 (Multiple Dwellings), if the Code of Ordinances of 
the City of Jersey City by Adding New Section 12, Entitled “Preventing Algorithmic Rent-Fixing in the 
Rental Housing Market”  
 
 
c.Violations and Penalties:  
 
i.A first violation of § 218-12 shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I, § 1-25. 
Subsequent violations shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and up to $2000, as provided in Chapter 1, 
General Provisions, Art. I, § 1-25. Each day during which an owner is in violation of § 218-12 shall constitute a 
separate violation hereunder. 
 
d.Attorneys Fees and Costs. In the case of any successful action to enforce liability pursuant to this Act, the court 
shall award plaintiff the costs of the action together with reasonable attorney fees as determined by the court. Costs 
and attorney fees shall be awarded to the attorney general or a city, county, or district attorney in all actions where 
the attorney general or the city, county, or district attorney successfully enforces this article. 
 
4.Severability. If any provision of this ordinance or application thereof to any person(s) or circumstances is judged 
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the 
ordinance that can be given effect without the invalidated provision or application and to this end the provisions of 
this ordinance are declared severable. 
 
§ 218-1213. - Exempt dwellings. 
No changes 
 
§ 218-1314. - Occupancy required. 
No changes 
 
§ 218-1415. - Extension of time period. 
No Changes 
 
§ 218-1516. - Violations and penalties 
No Changes 
 
§ 218-1617. - Conflicts with state law. 
No Changes 
 
§ 218-1718. - Findings. 
No Changes 
 
§ 218-1819. - Seating requirements. 
 
  
All Amendments are stricken out, underlined, and in italics 
 
Page 3 of 5

Ord. 25-057 
 
Ordinance Amending and Supplementing Chapter 218 (Multiple Dwellings), if the Code of Ordinances of 
the City of Jersey City by Adding New Section 12, Entitled “Preventing Algorithmic Rent-Fixing in the 
Rental Housing Market”  
 
 
RECORD OF COUNCIL VOTE ON INTRODUCTION – May 7 2025 
 RIDLEY  AYE  SALEH  AYE  DEGISE  AYE  
 HULINGS  AYE  SOLOMON  AYE  RIVERA  AYE 8-0 
 BOGGIANO  AYE  GILMORE  AYE  WATTERMAN, 
PRES 
 ABSENT  
 
RECORD OF COUNCIL VOTE TO CLOSE PUBLIC HEARING  – May 21 2025 
 RIDLEY  AYE  SALEH  AYE  DEGISE  AYE  
 HULINGS  AYE  SOLOMON  AYE  RIVERA  AYE 9-0 
 BOGGIANO  AYE  GILMORE  AYE  WATTERMAN, 
PRES. 
 AYE  
 
SPEAKERS: 
Ann M. Hill, Kaileen Perez, Joel Rothfus, Danielle Dadamo, Sarah Levine, Daniel Feldman, Mark Boyles, Noelle 
Brower, Wendy Paul, Kevin Weller, David Wilson, Bruce Shapiro, Shannon Rae, Eve Taylor, Suzanne DeFelice, 
Brendan Coughlin, Jessica Brann, Joe Tarrazi, Adrian Orozco, LaVerne Webb Washington, Shirin Vazir 
MacCormack & Michele Hirsch 
 
RECORD OF COUNCIL VOTE ON AMENDMENTS, IF ANY – May 21 2025 
 RIDLEY  AYE  SALEH  AYE  DEGISE  AYE  
 HULINGS  AYE  SOLOMON  AYE  RIVERA  AYE 9-0 
 BOGGIANO  AYE  GILMORE  AYE  WATTERMAN, 
PRES. 
 AYE  
 
RECORD OF FINAL COUNCIL VOTE – May 21 2025 
 RIDLEY  AYE  SALEH  AYE  DEGISE  AYE  
 HULINGS  AYE  SOLOMON  AYE  RIVERA  AYE 9-0 
 BOGGIANO  AYE  GILMORE  AYE  WATTERMAN, 
PRES. 
 AYE  
 
Adopted on first reading of the Council of Jersey City, N.J. on May 7 2025 
Adopted on second and final reading after hearing on May 21 2025 
 
This is to certify that the foregoing Ordinance was adopted 
by the Municipal Council at its meeting on May 21 2025 
 
 
  
.
  
City Clerk 
 
.
  
Joyce E. Watterman, President of Council 
Approved: May 21 2025 
 
   
  
.
  
Steven M. Fulop, Mayor 
Date to Mayor: May 22 2025 
Approved: May 22 2025 
 
Page 4 of 5

Ord. 25-057 
 
Ordinance Amending and Supplementing Chapter 218 (Multiple Dwellings), if the Code of Ordinances of 
the City of Jersey City by Adding New Section 12, Entitled “Preventing Algorithmic Rent-Fixing in the 
Rental Housing Market”  
 
FACT SHEET - 
This summary sheet is to be attached to the front of any ordinance that is submitted for Council consideration. 
Incomplete or vague fact sheets will be returned with the ordinance. 
 
Project Manager 
James Solomon, Councilperson 201-547-5315 jsolomon@jcnj.org  
Department  Municipal Council 
Division  Municipal Council 
 
Note: Project Manager must be available by phone during agenda meeting (Wednesday prior to council meeting @ 
1:00 p.m.)  
 
Meeting Regular Meeting of Municipal Council - May 21 2025 
 
Purpose 
Ordinance Amending Chapter 218 (Multiple Dwellings) creating Section 12, to prevent algorithmic rent-setting in 
Jersey City  
 
Cost (Identify all sources and amounts)  Contract term (include all)  
N/A   
 
Approved by Status: 
John Metro, Business Administrator Approved - Apr 29 2025 
 
Page 5 of 5
