NOTICE:  All slip opinions and orders are subject to formal 
revision and are superseded by the advance sheets and bound 
volumes of the Official Reports.  If you find a typographical 
error or other formal error, please notify the Reporter of 
Decisions, Supreme Judicial Court, John Adams Courthouse, 1 
Pemberton Square, Suite 2500, Boston, MA, 02108-1750; (617) 557-
1030; SJCReporter@sjc.state.ma.us 
 
SJC-13893 
 
ARCANGELO CELLA & others1  vs.  ATTORNEY GENERAL & another.2 
 
 
 
Suffolk.     May 6, 2026. - June 23, 2026. 
 
Present:  Budd, C.J., Gaziano, Kafker, Wendlandt, Georges, 
Dewar, & Wolohojian, JJ. 
 
 
Initiative.  Constitutional Law, Initiative petition.  Attorney 
General.  Religion.  Rent Control, Exemption.  Landlord and 
Tenant, Rent. 
 
 
 
Civil action commenced in the Supreme Judicial Court for 
the county of Suffolk on February 6, 2026. 
 
The case was reported by Gaziano, J. 
 
 
 Edmund P. Daley (Elissa Flynn-Poppey & Kadie D. Martin also 
present) for the plaintiffs. 
 Phoebe Fischer-Groban, Assistant Attorney General, for the 
defendants. 
 The following submitted briefs for amici curiae: 
 Frank J. Bailey, Paul R. Johnson, & Gabriela Forero for 
Pioneer New England Legal Foundation. 
 Laura F. Camara, Courtney Libon, Joseph Michalakes, & Mark 
Martinez for Homes for All Massachusetts. 
 
1 Teresa del Signore, Katherine Horey, and Susan M. Renfrew. 
 
2 Secretary of the Commonwealth. 
 

2 
 Curtis F. Dowling, of California, & Michael A. Bednarz for 
California Apartment Association. 
 Thaddeus A. Heuer, Andrew M. London, & Kevin Y. Chen for 
MassLandlords, Inc. 
 Meredith G. Fierro for Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce 
& others. 
 Elaine J. Goldenberg & Samuel H. Allen for Chamber of 
Commerce of the United States of America & others. 
 Kevin J. Powers for Millbury National Bank. 
 Dan Ordorica, Eloise Lawrence, Adam Druckman, Joshua Lilly, 
& Richard Lin for Massachusetts Teachers Association & others. 
 J. Nathan Cole & Herling D. Romero for National Electrical 
Contractors Association of Greater Boston, Inc., & others. 
 Thomas Silverstein, of New York, Audrey Lynn Martin, of 
Maryland, Jane Edmonstone, & Alycia M. Kennedy for Poverty 
& Race Research Action Council. 
 
 
 GAZIANO, J.  The plaintiffs, a group of registered voters, 
challenge the Attorney General's certification of Initiative 
Petition 25-21, titled "An Initiative Petition to Protect 
Tenants by Limiting Rent Increases."  The petition proposes a 
limit on annual rent increases for residential dwelling units 
but exempts several categories of units, including those in 
"facilities operated solely for . . . religious . . . purposes."  
Because of this exemption, we conclude that the petition 
"relates to religion, religious practices or religious 
institutions," an excluded matter under art. 48 of the 
Amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution.  See art. 48, The 
Initiative, II, § 2.  Accordingly, art. 48 bars placement of the 
petition on the November 2026 Statewide election ballot.3 
 
3 We acknowledge the amicus briefs submitted in support of 
the defendants by Homes for All Massachusetts; the Massachusetts 

3 
Background.  In 2025, a group of Massachusetts voters 
submitted the initiative petition, titled "An Initiative 
Petition to Protect Tenants by Limiting Rent Increases," to the 
Attorney General, who designated the petition as Initiative 
Petition 25-21.  
General Laws c. 40P, § 2, "broadly prohibits any regulatory 
scheme based upon or implementing rent control."  Rent control 
is defined to include "any regulation that in any way requires 
below-market rents for residential properties."  G. L. c. 40P, 
§ 3.  See G. L. c. 40P, § 4.  The petition, if enacted, would 
end the Statewide prohibition on rent control "by striking out 
[G. L. c. 40P]" and instituting in its place "a limit on any 
 
Teachers Association, Service Employees International Union 
Local 509, the Network for Public Health Law, Public Health Law 
Watch, ChangeLab Solutions, and Health in Partnership; and the 
Poverty & Race Research Action Council.  We also acknowledge the 
amicus briefs submitted in support of the plaintiffs by the 
California Apartment Association; MassLandlords, Inc.; the 
Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, the Charles River Regional 
Chamber, and the Retailers Association of Massachusetts; the 
Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America, Associated 
Industries of Massachusetts, and the National Association of 
REALTORS®; Millbury National Bank; National Electrical 
Contractors Association of Greater Boston, Inc., Associated 
General Contractors of Massachusetts, Associated Subcontractors 
of Massachusetts, Inc., Greater Boston Plumbing Contractors 
Association, New England Mechanical Contractors Association, 
Building Trades Employers' Association, and Construction 
Industries of Massachusetts, Inc.; and Pioneer New England Legal 
Foundation. 
 

4 
annual rent increase" set at "the annual increase in Consumer 
Price Index or [five percent], whichever is lower."4   
Rent control would apply to "covered dwelling unit[s]," 
defined as "all dwelling units leased for residential, but not 
commercial, use," with five exemptions.5  Relevant here, 
"[d]welling units in facilities operated solely for . . . 
religious . . . purposes" would be excluded. 
On September 3, 2025, the Attorney General certified that 
the petition contained only subjects that are not excluded from 
the initiative process and that it otherwise complied with the 
 
4 The stated purpose of the petition "is to provide housing 
stability for tenants, landlords, and communities across the 
[C]ommonwealth, and curb displacement as a result of the housing 
shortage and affordability crisis in Massachusetts." 
 
5 In full, the petition exempts:  
 
"(a) Dwelling units in owner-occupied buildings with four 
or fewer units. 
 
"(b) Dwelling units whose rents are subject to regulation 
by a public authority; provided, however, that occupancy by 
a tenant with a mobile housing voucher does not constitute 
being regulated by a public authority. 
 
"(c) Dwelling units that are rented primarily to transient 
guests for a period of less than 14 consecutive days. 
 
"(d) Dwelling units in facilities operated solely for 
educational, religious, or non-profit purposes. 
 
"(e) Dwelling units for which the first residential 
certificate of occupancy is less than 10 years old, for a 
period of 10 years from the date at which such certificate 
of occupancy was issued."  

5 
requirements of art. 48.  See art. 48, The Initiative, II, § 3, 
as amended by art. 74 of the Amendments.  The Attorney General 
also issued a summary of the petition as required by art. 48.  
See id.  The petition's proponents then filed the petition and 
summary with the Secretary of the Commonwealth (Secretary), who 
prepared and distributed blank signature forms for the 
proponents to circulate.  After the proponents provided the 
Secretary with the requisite number of signatures, the Secretary 
transmitted the petition to the clerk of the House of 
Representatives.  If the proponents timely submit sufficient 
additional signatures to the Secretary, the petition will be 
included on the November 2026 Statewide election ballot.  
On February 6, 2026, the plaintiffs -- four registered 
voters residing in the Commonwealth -- commenced an action in 
the county court against the Attorney General and the Secretary, 
seeking declaratory relief, as well as relief in the nature of 
certiorari and mandamus.  In their complaint, the plaintiffs 
requested that the court declare that "the [p]etition is invalid 
and not in compliance with the requirements of the Massachusetts 
Constitution," quash the Attorney General's certification of the 
petition, and enjoin the Secretary from placing the petition on 
the November 2026 Statewide election ballot.  The plaintiffs 
contend that the Attorney General should not have certified the 
petition as compliant with art. 48 because, among other things, 

6 
it impermissibly "relates to religion, religious practices, or 
religious institutions."6   
On February 9, 2026, the parties filed a joint motion 
requesting the case be reserved and reported to the full court.  
A single justice did so the following day.   
Discussion.  Before an initiative petition may be submitted 
to the people, the Attorney General must certify, among other 
things, that the petition "contains only subjects not excluded 
from the popular initiative."  Art. 48, The Initiative, II, § 3, 
as amended by art. 74.  See Carney v. Attorney Gen., 447 Mass. 
218, 225 (2006), S.C., 451 Mass. 803 (2008) (art. 48 obligates 
Attorney General "to ferret out obviously improper initiative 
petitions" [citation omitted]).  Our review of the Attorney 
General's decision to certify an initiative petition is de novo, 
with due consideration to "the firmly established principle that 
art. 48 is to be construed to support the people's prerogative 
to initiate and adopt laws" (citation omitted).  Clark v. 
Attorney Gen., 494 Mass. 187, 190 (2024). 
 
6 Given the result we reach, we do not address the 
plaintiffs' alternative arguments that the petition is 
inconsistent with the right to receive compensation for private 
property appropriated to public use, that it violates art. 48's 
related subjects requirement, or that the Attorney General's 
summary of the petition is unfair.  See Anderson v. Attorney 
Gen., 479 Mass. 780, 798 n.9 (2018). 

7 
1.  Religious subjects exclusion.  Article 48 reserves the 
power of Massachusetts voters to submit initiative petitions to 
the people for approval or rejection.  See art. 48, I.  See also 
Mazzone v. Attorney Gen., 432 Mass. 515, 519 (2000).  But this 
power is limited.  "The people for their own protection have 
provided that the initiative shall not be employed with respect 
to certain matters" because "[s]ome matters are naturally 
unsuitable for popular lawmaking."  Collins v. Secretary of the 
Commonwealth, 407 Mass. 837, 844 (1990), quoting Bowe v. 
Secretary of the Commonwealth, 320 Mass. 230, 247 (1946).  These 
matters are listed in art. 48's "Excluded Matters" section, 
which, in relevant part, provides:  "No measure that relates to 
religion, religious practices or religious institutions . . . 
shall be proposed by an initiative petition."  Art. 48, The 
Initiative, II, § 2.7   
 
7 Art. 48, The Initiative, II, § 2, first par., provides:   
 
"No measure that relates to religion, religious practices 
or religious institutions; or to the appointment, 
qualification, tenure, removal, recall or compensation of 
judges; or to the reversal of a judicial decision; or to 
the powers, creation or abolition of courts; or the 
operation of which is restricted to a particular town, city 
or other political division or to particular districts or 
localities of the commonwealth; or that makes a specific 
appropriation of money from the treasury of the 
commonwealth, shall be proposed by an initiative petition; 
but if a law approved by the people is not repealed, the 
general court shall raise by taxation or otherwise and 
shall appropriate such money as may be necessary to carry 
such law into effect." 

8 
Our analysis begins with the text of art. 48, giving its 
words "their natural and obvious sense according to common and 
approved usage" (citation omitted).  Opinion of the Justices, 
309 Mass. 555, 557 (1941).  Although the plain meaning of words 
used in art. 48 "cannot be . . . controlled" by the historical 
context, Yont v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 275 Mass. 365, 
369 (1931), we may also consider "the conditions under which 
[art. 48] . . . [was] framed, the ends which it was designed to 
accomplish, the benefits which it was expected to confer and the 
evils which it was hoped to remedy" (citation omitted), Mazzone, 
432 Mass. at 526. 
"No measure that relates to religion, religious practices 
or religious institutions" may be the subject of an initiative 
petition.  Art. 48, The Initiative, II, § 2.  "Under the plain 
meaning of art. 48, where a law by its terms deals with 
religion, religious practices, or religious institutions, it is 
excluded" (quotation and citation omitted).  Collins, 407 Mass. 
at 851.  In other words, an initiative petition relates to 
religion if religion is "a factor in [the initiative petition's] 
application."  Opinion of the Justices, 309 Mass. at 558-559.  
Our interpretation of the religion exclusion comports with 
the intent of the framers of art. 48, as evidenced by the 
debates of the constitutional convention of 1917–1918 
(convention).  See Bates v. Director of the Office of Campaign & 

9 
Political Fin., 436 Mass. 144, 156 (2002).  See also Opinion of 
the Justices, 413 Mass. 1201, 1204 (1992) (convention debates 
contextualize "how [art. 48] was received and understood by that 
convention, and, consequently, how it was commonly understood at 
the time of its adoption").  During the convention, multiple 
delegates expressed concern that initiative petitions relating 
to religion, religious practices, or religious institutions 
would spark harmful public political debate.  See 2 Debates in 
the Massachusetts Constitutional Convention 1917–1918, 766-769 
(1918) (Constitutional Debates).  The delegates considered the 
religion exclusion necessary "to avoid the consequences of 
permitting State-wide public political discussion" of such 
matters.  Collins, 407 Mass. at 845.  See Constitutional 
Debates, supra at 767-769.  The religion exclusion additionally 
reflects the delegates' general desire to separate religion from 
politics.  As one delegate remarked, based on his belief in "the 
entire separation of church and State," "[W]e ought to make it 
as difficult as possible to bring religious questions into the 
politics of this State."  Id. at 769.8  
 
8 These same convention delegates also sought to separate 
religion and politics through the anti-aid amendment to the 
Massachusetts Constitution, which "prohibited any use of public 
money or property for the aid of any private school."  
Commonwealth v. School Comm. of Springfield, 382 Mass. 665, 671 
(1981).  See art. 18 of the Amendments to the Massachusetts 
Constitution, as amended by art. 46 of the Amendments.   
 

10 
We have examined the religion exclusion in two opinions.9  
First, in Opinion of the Justices, 309 Mass. 555, we considered 
an initiative petition that would allow physicians to provide 
contraceptive care to married couples.  The initiative petition 
at issue did not include any language expressly concerning 
religion.  See id. at 556.  We determined that the initiative 
petition was unrelated to religion because it concerned "the 
promotion and preservation of the public health," which, 
"[a]ccording to common understanding, . . . is a secular field."  
Id. at 558-559.  While we acknowledged that "[s]ome or many 
persons may regard all conduct as involving obedience or 
disobedience to the will of the Creator," thereby implicating 
the possibility that all conduct may have religious 
connotations, we rejected the argument that the proposed law 
 
The convention adopted the anti-aid amendment to "promote 
civic harmony" by removing religion "as far as possible" from 
politics (citation omitted).  Caplan v. Acton, 479 Mass. 69, 80–
81 (2018).  And as one convention delegate noted, the religion 
exclusion appeared to be "perfectly in harmony with . . . the 
wise provisions of the anti-aid amendment."  Constitutional 
Debates, supra at 768.  Beyond adopting the anti-aid amendment, 
convention delegates added religion as an excluded matter under 
art. 48 "[t]o further ensure that matters affecting religion 
would not be subject to public debate."  Collins, 407 Mass. at 
846 n.8.   
  
9 A group of plaintiffs also challenged an initiative 
petition under the religion exclusion in Anderson v. Secretary 
of the Commonwealth, 255 Mass. 366 (1926), but we did not reach 
the question whether the challenged petition violated art. 48. 
 

11 
violated the religion exclusion, as that exclusion "was not 
intended . . . to exclude from the initiative all measures 
relating to conduct."  Id. at 558.  Instead, we construed the 
religion exclusion to prohibit only initiative petitions that 
"relate distinctively 'to religion, religious practices or 
religious institutions.'"  Id., quoting art. 48, The Initiative, 
II, § 2.   
More recently, in Collins, 407 Mass. at 838-839, we 
determined that a law subject to a referendum10 related to 
religion in violation of art. 48.  The law at issue in Collins 
concerned discrimination based on sexual orientation in housing, 
employment, the granting of credit, and public accommodations.  
Id. at 839-841.  If the referendum passed, it "would reinstate 
. . . prior, more limited, statutory exemptions" for religious 
institutions.  Id. at 841.  We concluded that the law, which "on 
its face expressly purport[ed] to alter the rights and 
obligations of religious institutions," could not be made the 
subject of a referendum petition because it related to religion, 
religious practices, or religious institutions within the 
meaning of art. 48.  Id. at 847-849.  In so concluding, we 
 
10 Although Collins concerned a referendum petition, while 
here we are concerned with an initiative petition, the relevant 
excluded matters language in art. 48 is identical for the two 
measures.  See art. 48, The Initiative, II, § 2; art. 48, The 
Referendum, III, § 2. 
 

12 
stated that the law made religion a "factor in the application 
of the exemption" and "alter[ed] the legal status of religious 
institutions with respect to discrimination," providing them 
with "special treatment."  Id. at 847-848.  Consequently, if the 
law had been made the subject of a referendum, voters would have 
been asked to consider "whether the scope of freedom of 
religious institutions to discriminate should be expanded or 
constricted."  Id. at 848. 
2.  Application.  Initiative Petition 25-21 subjects all 
"covered dwelling units" to rent control.  However, the petition 
excludes several categories of residential properties from its 
definition of "covered dwelling units," including those in 
"facilities operated solely for educational, religious, or non-
profit purposes."  The petition, like the law subject to a 
referendum in Collins, 407 Mass. 837, concerns a generally 
secular subject matter -- rent control.  But, by including an 
express exemption for facilities operated solely for religious 
purposes, the petition impermissibly makes religion "a factor in 
[the petition's] application."  Id. at 851, quoting Opinion of 
the Justices, 309 Mass. at 559.  And in order to enforce the 
proposed law, the exemption would require the government to 
determine if a facility is "operated solely for . . . religious 
. . . purposes," and then make an enforcement decision based on 
the facility's religious purpose (or lack thereof).  Further, 

13 
the petition would confer preferential treatment on religious 
institutions by allowing them to increase rent prices, while 
limiting rent increases for secular facilities.  See Collins, 
supra at 848.11   
The Attorney General argues that the petition does not 
discriminate in favor of religious institutions because it also 
provides exemptions for secular dwelling units, including 
facilities operated for educational and nonprofit purposes.  The 
presence of secular exemptions does not negate that the 
petition, on its face, uses religion as "a factor in its 
application" (citation omitted).  Collins, 407 Mass. at 851.  
Nor do these secular exemptions change the fact that the 
petition, by including a carveout for religious facilities, 
brings "religious questions into the politics of this State" 
(citation omitted).  Id. at 846.  
The Attorney General also argues that the petition was 
properly certified because its "main purpose" -- limiting rent 
increases -- is unrelated to religion.  We have applied a "main 
purpose" test when considering whether an initiative petition 
concerns another excluded matter:  "the powers . . . of courts."  
 
11 In the present posture, our role is limited to 
determining whether the initiative petition complies with art. 
48; it does not include positing whether there may be other 
constitutional ramifications of the proposed law once enacted.  
See Collins, 407 Mass. at 850 & n.9. 
 

14 
Art. 48, The Initiative, II, § 2.  See Mazzone, 432 Mass. at 
519-522.  Under the "main purpose" test, "we have said that an 
initiative petition is not excluded by art. 48 unless its 'main 
design' or 'main purpose' is to affect the powers of the courts" 
(citation omitted).  Albano v. Attorney Gen., 437 Mass. 156, 158 
(2002).  Stated differently, "[t]o fall within the exclusion, 
the petition must affect the powers of the courts in more than 
an incidental or subsidiary way."  Id. at 158–159. 
The "main purpose" test is appropriate for initiative 
petitions concerning the powers of the courts because this 
subject could be implicated whenever there is "any change in any 
law that [is] enforceable in the courts" (citation omitted).  
Mazzone, 432 Mass. at 520.  Thus, an "overly rigid 
interpretation of [that] phrase" would turn the initiative 
process into "a near nullity" (citation omitted).  Id. at 519–
520. 
We have not yet decided whether the main purpose test 
applies to measures related to religion.  See Collins, 407 Mass. 
at 851 n.10 (declining to determine whether main purpose test, 
or variant thereof, applied to art. 48 for measures relating to 
religion).  We decline to apply it here.  Unlike the exclusion 
relating to the powers of the courts, which could otherwise be 
implicated by virtually any petition proposing a judicially 
enforceable law, applying the religion exclusion according to 

15 
its plain language -- to exclude all petitions proposing laws 
that "relate[] to religion, religious practices or religious 
institutions" -- does not threaten to swallow the entirety of 
art. 48.  As we have already recognized, although religious 
beliefs may encompass a wide array of human conduct, an 
initiative petition does not "relate[]" to religion within the 
meaning of art. 48 just because a person's personal religious 
beliefs might inform his or her views on an otherwise secular 
subject matter; rather, the measure itself must relate to 
religion.  See Opinion of the Justices, 309 Mass. at 558-559 
(initiative petition regarding contraception concerned "secular 
field" not related to religion).  Accordingly, unlike with the 
exclusion for measures relating to the power of courts, petition 
proponents may readily avoid this excluded matter by eschewing 
any "terms deal[ing] with religion, religious practices, or 
religious institutions" (citation omitted).  Collins, supra at 
851. 
Applying a less exacting standard -- permitting at least 
some measures that by their own terms govern religion, religious 
practices, or religious institutions -- would contravene not 
only the plain language of art. 48, but also the intent of its 
framers.  The convention delegates intended to strictly maintain 
"the entire separation of church and State" by "mak[ing] it as 

16 
difficult as possible to bring religious questions into the 
politics of this State."  Constitutional Debates, supra at 769.   
Conclusion.  The petition contains matters "relat[ing] to 
religion, religious practices or religious institutions" in 
violation of art. 48.  Art. 48, The Initiative, II, § 2.  We 
remand the matter to the county court for entry of a judgment 
declaring that Initiative Petition 25-21 is not in compliance 
with the excluded matters section of art. 48, and enjoining the 
Secretary from taking steps to place the measure on the 2026 
Statewide election ballot.  
       So ordered.

KAFKER, J. (concurring).  I concur albeit on narrower 
grounds.  Although most of the initiative, which proposes to 
limit residential rent increases for large for-profit landlords, 
clearly has nothing to do with religion or religious 
institutions, its exemption for "[d]welling units in facilities 
operated solely for . . . religious . . . purposes" requires 
application of a test based on religion (emphasis added).  This 
religious test also invites an intrusive review of religious 
beliefs and practices proscribed by art. 48 of the Amendments to 
the Massachusetts Constitution, as the test whether a rental 
unit is being operated "solely for . . . religious . . . 
purposes" requires an inquiry into the internal affairs of, and 
even the motives and purposes of, a religious institution, as 
well as its finances.  That, in my opinion, is prohibited by 
art. 48. 
 The express purpose of the initiative in question is "to 
provide housing stability for tenants, landlords, and 
communities across the commonwealth, and curb displacement as a 
result of the housing shortage and affordability crisis in 
Massachusetts."  This express purpose is clearly secular, not 
religious.  The initiative would limit the annual rent increases 
for residential dwelling units in the Commonwealth by the lower 
of the annual increase in the Consumer Price Index or five 
percent.  It would apply to "all dwelling units leased for 

2 
residential, but not commercial, use," except that, as relevant 
here, it would not apply to "[d]welling units in facilities 
operated solely for educational, religious, or non-profit 
purposes."  Apart from this one exemption, this initiative does 
not in any way "relate[] to religion, religious practices or 
religious institutions."1  Art. 48, The Initiative, II, § 2. 
Whether this rent control provision nonetheless relates to 
religion as proscribed by art. 48 is the question before this 
court.  I conclude that the specific language of the exemption, 
particularly its required test to determine whether the dwelling 
unit is operated "solely for . . . religious . . . purposes," 
renders it improper, as it raises a distinct, intrusive, and 
potentially divisive religious inquiry.  Had the initiative 
simply stated that it limits rent increases in dwelling units 
operated by for-profit institutions, but not in dwelling units 
operated by non-profit institutions, a very different question 
would have been presented.  Distinguishing for-profit from non-
profit institutions does not require an analysis that relates to 
religion or religious institutions. 
Article 48 provides:  "No measure that relates to religion, 
religious practices or religious institutions . . . shall be 
proposed by an initiative petition."  Art. 48, The Initiative, 
 
1 I am aware of no other State that has such a religion 
exclusion in its initiative or referendum process. 

3 
II, § 2.  Neither "relates to" nor "religion, religious 
practices or religious institutions" are further defined by the 
article or other provisions of the Constitution, nor, in my 
view, is the plain meaning of these terms obvious.2  See Opinion 
of the Justices, 309 Mass. 555, 557 (1941).  This court has also 
addressed this provision in only two opinions:  the 1941 Opinion 
of the Justices, supra, and Collins v. Secretary of the 
Commonwealth, 407 Mass. 837 (1990), both of which provide only 
limited guidance. 
 In attempting to discern the meaning of the provision, the 
court in Collins reviewed the constitutional history of the 
provision, explaining that the sponsor of the amendment that 
would become the religion provision in art. 48, Louis Swig of 
Taunton,  
"expressed his purpose to 'protect the initiative and 
referendum against those . . . [who] try to get political 
preferment because of their religious belief, and . . . to 
protect the initiative and referendum from the efforts that 
will be made . . . to drag constantly before the people 
these religious fights.'  [2 Debates in the Massachusetts 
Constitutional Convention 1917-1918, 766-767 (1918)].  
[Edwin] Curtis of Boston expressed the view 'that all 
religious subjects would be handled better by considering 
 
2 Concern about the ambiguity of the religion exclusion's 
language was raised at the constitutional convention that 
ratified art. 48.  As one delegate put it, "some court would 
have to say what is religion and what is not, what is a 
religious practice and what is not, and you know how we all 
differ on those matters.  I think that psalm-singing is a 
religious practice, and you do not, and we never can agree on 
it."  2 Debates in the Massachusetts Constitutional Convention 
1917-1918, 982 (1918). 

4 
them before the Legislature than . . . [by] making them the 
subject of a general discussion by the people at 
large.'  Id. at 768.  [Frederick] Anderson of Newton stated 
his belief 'in the entire separation of church and State, 
. . . that religion has no place in politics at all, . . . 
[and] that we ought to make it as difficult as possible to 
bring religious questions into the politics of this 
State.'  Id. at 769." 
 
Collins, 407 Mass. at 845-846.  E. Gerry Brown of Brockton 
referenced the anti-aid amendment, which was also debated and 
passed at the same constitutional convention and prevented 
public funds from being used to support religious schools.3  
Ultimately, "Swig's amendment was carried by voice vote . . . 
and was later inserted into the provisions governing the 
referendum."  Id. at 846.  As discussed infra, this 
constitutional history is subject to conflicting interpretations 
when addressing exceptions, in otherwise secular initiatives, 
designed to preserve the separation of church and State or to 
protect the free exercise of religion.   
 The Justices attempted to clarify the meaning and scope of 
the art. 48 "relates to religion" prohibition in Opinion of the 
 
3 "Proponents of [the anti-aid amendment at the same 
constitutional convention] urged that liberty of conscience was 
infringed whenever a citizen was taxed to support the religious 
institutions of others; that the churches would benefit in 
independence and dignity by not relying on governmental support; 
and, more generally or colloquially, that to promote civic 
harmony the irritating question of religion should be removed 
from politics as far as possible, and with it the unseemly and 
potentially dangerous scramble of religious institutions for 
public funds in ever-increasing amounts."  Bloom v. School Comm. 
of Springfield, 376 Mass. 35, 39 (1978). 

5 
Justices.  In that opinion, the Justices considered a proposed 
law entitled "An Act to allow physicians to provide medical 
contraceptive care to married persons for the protection of life 
or health."  Opinion of the Justices, 309 Mass. at 556.  As 
summarized by the Attorney General at the time:  
"The proposed measure provides that the present statutes 
which make it a crime . . . knowingly to advertise, . . . 
publish, . . . or circulate any matter containing reference 
to any person from whom or place where any drug, instrument 
or means whatever, or any advice or information may be 
obtained, for the purpose of preventing pregnancy, or to 
sell, . . . offer or advertise any drug, medicine, 
instrument or other article for the prevention of 
conception, . . . shall not apply to treatment or 
prescription given to married persons for protection of 
life or health by or under the direction of registered 
physicians nor to teaching in chartered medical schools nor 
to publication or sale of medical treatises or journals." 
 
Opinion of the Justices, 309 Mass. at 556-557. 
In concluding that the initiative did not relate to 
religion, the Justices recognized that "[s]ome or many persons 
may regard all conduct as involving obedience or disobedience to 
the will of the Creator," but that is not the standard for 
evaluating what is proscribed by art. 48.  Id. at 558.  The 
Justices instead recognized that "a measure to be excluded 
thereby from the initiative must relate distinctively 'to 
religion, religious practices or religious institutions'" 
(emphasis added).  Id.  The law at issue did not for a number of 
reasons.  As further explained by the Justices: 

6 
"The proposed law . . . for the promotion and preservation 
of the public health by regulating medical prescription and 
treatment and teaching . . . [is, a]ccording to common 
understanding, . . . in general . . . secular . . . .  The 
proposed law is [also] purely permissive.  Religion is not 
a factor in its application and, if approved by the voters, 
it will not interfere with the freedom of any person within 
its scope to act in strict accordance with his religious 
views." 
 
Opinion of the Justices, 309 Mass. at 558-559.4   
Further guidance in the application of the religion 
exclusion was provided in Collins, 407 Mass. at 844-852.  In 
that case, the referendum at issue was of "An Act making it 
unlawful to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation."5  
Id. at 838.  That act, however, included two provisions that 
expanded religious institutions' current exemption from 
antidiscrimination laws.  Not only did it provide an exemption 
for religious institutions against discrimination based on 
sexual orientation, but it also expanded existing religious 
exemptions.  The act  
"include[d] a broad 'preferment' of religious institutions 
to discriminate on the basis of race, color, religious 
creed, national origin, sex, age, ancestry, handicap and 
 
4 Justice Henry T. Lummus, signatory to the 1941 Opinion of 
the Justices, not only was a delegate to the 1917-1918 
constitutional convention, but was also a member of the 
convention's committee on initiative and referendum. 
5 In addition to enabling initiative petitions proposing new 
legislation, art. 48 also provides for referendums on existing 
laws, which are subject to the identical prohibition on 
religious matters.  Analysis of the religion exclusion is 
therefore the same, whether the art. 48 ballot measure in 
question is an initiative petition or referendum. 

7 
. . . sexual orientation in ways not permitted of any other 
persons or organizations.  [If such a preferment] were made 
the subject of a referendum, the public would be permitted 
to vote directly on how religious institutions may conduct 
themselves."   
 
Id. at 848.  The court distinguished this referendum from the 
initiative addressed in Opinion of the Justices, 309 Mass. 555:  
"In contrast . . . , these provisions [expanding the exemption 
of religious institutions from antidiscrimination laws] make an 
institution's connection with religion the sole factor in the 
application of the exemption, and make 'religious principles' 
the sole basis upon which [certain] discrimination is 
permitted."  Collins, supra. 
In applying these two opinions to the facts of the instant 
case, I recognize that the line drawing in this area is 
difficult.  Where the initiative concerns matters commonly 
understood to be secular, interference with the power of the 
people to legislate should be respected.  See Opinion of the 
Justices, 309 Mass. at 558.  See also Yankee Atomic Elec. Co. v. 
Secretary of the Commonwealth, 403 Mass. 203, 211 (1988) ("art. 
48 is to be construed to support the people's prerogative to 
initiate and adopt laws").  Opinion of the Justices, 309 Mass. 
at 558, makes this point explicitly.  It was also, however, 
important to the Justices that the initiative at issue involved 
the express application of no tests based in any way on 

8 
religion.  Id. at 559 ("[r]eligion is not a factor in its 
application"). 
Where distinctions are expressly drawn based on religion, 
as they were in Collins, a different set of considerations come 
into play.  Whether all such distinctions violate art. 48 is in 
my view a very difficult question.  Is the recognition in an 
initiative of any distinction necessary to preserve the 
separation of church and State, or to protect the right to the 
free exercise of religion as required by the State or Federal 
Constitutions,6 or to prohibit State support of religious 
institutions as required by the anti-aid amendment enough to 
 
6 In the view of at least two Justices, the religious 
exemption to the antidiscrimination law in Collins was included 
for this precise reason.  See Collins, 407 Mass. at 852 (Nolan, 
J., dissenting) ("Clearly, the Legislature added §§ 1 and 14, 
not to benefit religious institutions, but to mitigate the risk 
of the statute being attacked on constitutional grounds").  I 
further note that the United States Supreme Court has found the 
procedures and processes for State initiative petitions to be in 
violation of the First Amendment to the United States 
Constitution.  See, e.g., Buckley v. American Constitutional Law 
Found., 525 U.S. 182, 193-197 (1999) (holding that State 
constitutional amendment requiring initiative petition 
circulators to be registered voters violated First Amendment).  
See also Hermann v. Attorney Gen., 492 Mass. 51, 59-60 (2023) 
("While the question whether a proposed law [imposing limits on 
political contributions] bears on an excluded subject under art. 
48 is by its terms a question of State constitutional law, in 
the instant cases, the question to be decided ultimately 
revolves around Federal constitutional law.  This is because we 
cannot provide less protection under the Massachusetts 
Declaration of Rights for political contributions than that 
provided for such contributions under the First Amendment 
. . ."). 
 

9 
render an otherwise permissible secular initiative a violation 
of the "relates to religion" prohibition of art. 48?  
Preservation of the separation of church and State, protecting 
the right to the free exercise of religion, and prohibiting 
State support of religious schools were also important 
constitutional objectives at the constitutional convention.  
See, e.g., art. 46 of the Amendments to the Massachusetts 
Constitution (containing anti-aid and free exercise provisions 
devised at same convention as art. 48).  The constitutional 
history thus cuts both ways when considering an exception in an 
otherwise secular initiative designed to protect the separation 
of church and State, the free exercise of religion, and anti-aid 
principles.  To avoid the difficult constitutional questions 
presented by initiatives recognizing such necessary 
distinctions, I would decide the validity of this initiative on 
much narrower grounds, as did the court in Collins.7 
 
7 It is true that the Collins court stated that "the inquiry 
whether a law is excluded from the initiative under art. 48 is a 
separate and distinct inquiry from whether it would be 
constitutional if enacted."  Collins, 407 Mass. at 850.  That is 
because of the difficulty of conclusively resolving 
constitutional questions prematurely and "abstractly," an 
observation this court has found "particularly pertinent with 
respect to constitutional questions regarding the rights of 
religious institutions" (citation omitted).  Id. at 850 n.9.  
That question, however, is distinct from the interpretive 
question whether an initiative that seeks to anticipate and 
avoid a constitutional question regarding religion through an 
exception in an otherwise secular initiative is nonetheless in 
violation of the religion prohibition in art. 48.  The presence 

10 
The court in Collins could have simply said that any 
initiative or referendum that contains any religious distinction 
in any provision runs afoul of the art. 48 prohibition against 
initiatives or referendums that relate to religion, but it did 
not.  The court's holding focused instead on the significant 
expansion of the religious exemption in the act that was the 
subject of the referendum.  See Collins, 407 Mass. at 848.  I 
would likewise focus on the significance, and potential 
divisiveness, of the religious exemption being drawn here.8   
Although the essence of the initiative here involves a  
secular subject, rent control, as drafted it would require an 
express religious consideration in determining whether an 
exemption applied.  That exemption also would not simply 
reference a religious exception already well recognized in 
 
of such distinctions in the initiative itself may help to 
reassure voters considering whether to vote in favor of passing 
an initiative that it does not violate such constitutional 
rights. 
 
8 I agree with the court that we do not employ a "main 
purpose" test to determine whether the initiative violates the 
"relates to religion" prohibition in art. 48.  Even if the main 
purpose relates to something else, as the act at issue in 
Collins related to sexual orientation discrimination, it may 
still present a significant, divisive question related to 
religion that is sufficient to trigger the prohibition.  This 
can occur even in a few provisions, as it did in Collins.  At 
the same time, some religious exemptions may be too 
insignificant or uncontroversial to derail an initiative, for 
example, a referendum on whether to exclude church bingo from 
the list of permissible games of chance -- a measure that 
reached the ballot in 1944.  See G. L. c. 271, § 22A. 

11 
existing law, which would have presented a more difficult 
question.  Rather the exemption provided would require an 
analysis whether the dwelling unit of a religious institution 
was being operated "solely for . . . religious . . . purposes."  
This is a fraught inquiry.  It invites an analysis into the 
internal affairs of religious organizations and their 
motivations for providing the dwelling units, and the costs they 
charge for them.  Whether a dwelling unit in a religious 
institution, including a religious retirement community, 
university, or sober house, for example, is being operated 
solely for religious purposes appears to require a deep dive 
into not only the religious institution's finances, but also its 
religious practices and beliefs.  For these reasons, I conclude, 
the religious exemption, as drafted, runs afoul of the 
prohibition in art. 48. 
 
